TITLE: Alice's Adventures in Wonderland
AUTHOR: Lewis Carroll


= CHAPTER I = 
=( Down the Rabbit-Hole )=

  Alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister
on the bank, and of having nothing to do:  once or twice she had
peeped into the book her sister was reading, but it had no
pictures or conversations in it, `and what is the use of a book,'
thought Alice `without pictures or conversation?'

  So she was considering in her own mind (as well as she could,
for the hot day made her feel very sleepy and stupid), whether
the pleasure of making a daisy-chain would be worth the trouble
of getting up and picking the daisies, when suddenly a White
Rabbit with pink eyes ran close by her.

  There was nothing so VERY remarkable in that; nor did Alice
think it so VERY much out of the way to hear the Rabbit say to
itself, `Oh dear!  Oh dear!  I shall be late!'  (when she thought
it over afterwards, it occurred to her that she ought to have
wondered at this, but at the time it all seemed quite natural);
but when the Rabbit actually TOOK A WATCH OUT OF ITS WAISTCOAT-
POCKET, and looked at it, and then hurried on, Alice started to
her feet, for it flashed across her mind that she had never
before seen a rabbit with either a waistcoat-pocket, or a watch to
take out of it, and burning with curiosity, she ran across the
field after it, and fortunately was just in time to see it pop
down a large rabbit-hole under the hedge.

  In another moment down went Alice after it, never once
considering how in the world she was to get out again.

  The rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel for some way,
and then dipped suddenly down, so suddenly that Alice had not a
moment to think about stopping herself before she found herself
falling down a very deep well.

  Either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she
had plenty of time as she went down to look about her and to
wonder what was going to happen next.  First, she tried to look
down and make out what she was coming to, but it was too dark to
see anything; then she looked at the sides of the well, and
noticed that they were filled with cupboards and book-shelves;
here and there she saw maps and pictures hung upon pegs.  She
took down a jar from one of the shelves as she passed; it was
labelled `ORANGE MARMALADE', but to her great disappointment it
was empty:  she did not like to drop the jar for fear of killing
somebody, so managed to put it into one of the cupboards as she
fell past it.

  `Well!' thought Alice to herself, `after such a fall as this, I
shall think nothing of tumbling down stairs!  How brave they'll
all think me at home!  Why, I wouldn't say anything about it,
even if I fell off the top of the house!' (Which was very likely
true.)

  Down, down, down.  Would the fall NEVER come to an end!  `I
wonder how many miles I've fallen by this time?' she said aloud.
`I must be getting somewhere near the centre of the earth.  Let
me see:  that would be four thousand miles down, I think--' (for,
you see, Alice had learnt several things of this sort in her
lessons in the schoolroom, and though this was not a VERY good
opportunity for showing off her knowledge, as there was no one to
listen to her, still it was good practice to say it over) `--yes,
that's about the right distance--but then I wonder what Latitude
or Longitude I've got to?'  (Alice had no idea what Latitude was,
or Longitude either, but thought they were nice grand words to
say.)

  Presently she began again.  `I wonder if I shall fall right
THROUGH the earth!  How funny it'll seem to come out among the
people that walk with their heads downward!  The Antipathies, I
think--' (she was rather glad there WAS no one listening, this
time, as it didn't sound at all the right word) `--but I shall
have to ask them what the name of the country is, you know.
Please, Ma'am, is this New Zealand or Australia?' (and she tried
to curtsey as she spoke--fancy CURTSEYING as you're falling
through the air!  Do you think you could manage it?)  `And what
an ignorant little girl she'll think me for asking!  No, it'll
never do to ask:  perhaps I shall see it written up somewhere.'

  Down, down, down.  There was nothing else to do, so Alice soon
began talking again.  `Dinah'll miss me very much to-night, I
should think!'  (Dinah was the cat.)  `I hope they'll remember
her saucer of milk at tea-time.  Dinah my dear!  I wish you were
down here with me!  There are no mice in the air, I'm afraid, but
you might catch a bat, and that's very like a mouse, you know.
But do cats eat bats, I wonder?'  And here Alice began to get
rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a dreamy sort of
way, `Do cats eat bats?  Do cats eat bats?' and sometimes, `Do
bats eat cats?' for, you see, as she couldn't answer either
question, it didn't much matter which way she put it.  She felt
that she was dozing off, and had just begun to dream that she
was walking hand in hand with Dinah, and saying to her very
earnestly, `Now, Dinah, tell me the truth:  did you ever eat a
bat?' when suddenly, thump! thump! down she came upon a heap of
sticks and dry leaves, and the fall was over.

  Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a
moment:  she looked up, but it was all dark overhead; before her
was another long passage, and the White Rabbit was still in
sight, hurrying down it.  There was not a moment to be lost:
away went Alice like the wind, and was just in time to hear it
say, as it turned a corner, `Oh my ears and whiskers, how late
it's getting!'  She was close behind it when she turned the
corner, but the Rabbit was no longer to be seen:  she found
herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps
hanging from the roof.

  There were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked;
and when Alice had been all the way down one side and up the
other, trying every door, she walked sadly down the middle,
wondering how she was ever to get out again.

  Suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table, all made of
solid glass; there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key,
and Alice's first thought was that it might belong to one of the
doors of the hall; but, alas! either the locks were too large, or
the key was too small, but at any rate it would not open any of
them.  However, on the second time round, she came upon a low
curtain she had not noticed before, and behind it was a little
door about fifteen inches high:  she tried the little golden key
in the lock, and to her great delight it fitted!

  Alice opened the door and found that it led into a small
passage, not much larger than a rat-hole:  she knelt down and
looked along the passage into the loveliest garden you ever saw.
How she longed to get out of that dark hall, and wander about
among those beds of bright flowers and those cool fountains, but
she could not even get her head through the doorway; `and even if
my head would go through,' thought poor Alice, `it would be of
very little use without my shoulders.  Oh, how I wish
I could shut up like a telescope!  I think I could, if I only
know how to begin.'  For, you see, so many out-of-the-way things
had happened lately, that Alice had begun to think that very few
things indeed were really impossible.

  There seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, so she
went back to the table, half hoping she might find another key on
it, or at any rate a book of rules for shutting people up like
telescopes:  this time she found a little bottle on it, (`which
certainly was not here before,' said Alice,) and round the neck
of the bottle was a paper label, with the words `DRINK ME'
beautifully printed on it in large letters.

  It was all very well to say `Drink me,' but the wise little
Alice was not going to do THAT in a hurry.  `No, I'll look
first,' she said, `and see whether it's marked "poison" or not';
for she had read several nice little histories about children who
had got burnt, and eaten up by wild beasts and other unpleasant
things, all because they WOULD not remember the simple rules
their friends had taught them:  such as, that a red-hot poker
will burn you if you hold it too long; and that if you cut your
finger VERY deeply with a knife, it usually bleeds; and she had
never forgotten that, if you drink much from a bottle marked
`poison,' it is almost certain to disagree with you, sooner or
later.

  However, this bottle was NOT marked `poison,' so Alice ventured
to taste it, and finding it very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort
of mixed flavour of cherry-tart, custard, pine-apple, roast
turkey, toffee, and hot buttered toast,) she very soon finished
it off.

     *       *       *       *       *       *       *

         *       *       *       *       *       *

     *       *       *       *       *       *       *

  `What a curious feeling!' said Alice; `I must be shutting up
like a telescope.'

  And so it was indeed:  she was now only ten inches high, and
her face brightened up at the thought that she was now the right
size for going through the little door into that lovely garden.
First, however, she waited for a few minutes to see if she was
going to shrink any further:  she felt a little nervous about
this; `for it might end, you know,' said Alice to herself, `in my
going out altogether, like a candle.  I wonder what I should be
like then?'  And she tried to fancy what the flame of a candle is
like after the candle is blown out, for she could not remember
ever having seen such a thing.

  After a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided
on going into the garden at once; but, alas for poor Alice!
when she got to the door, she found she had forgotten the
little golden key, and when she went back to the table for it,
she found she could not possibly reach it:  she could see it
quite plainly through the glass, and she tried her best to climb
up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery;
and when she had tired herself out with trying,
the poor little thing sat down and cried.

  `Come, there's no use in crying like that!' said Alice to
herself, rather sharply; `I advise you to leave off this minute!'
She generally gave herself very good advice, (though she very
seldom followed it), and sometimes she scolded herself so
severely as to bring tears into her eyes; and once she remembered
trying to box her own ears for having cheated herself in a game
of croquet she was playing against herself, for this curious
child was very fond of pretending to be two people.  `But it's no
use now,' thought poor Alice, `to pretend to be two people!  Why,
there's hardly enough of me left to make ONE respectable
person!'

  Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under
the table:  she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on
which the words `EAT ME' were beautifully marked in currants.
`Well, I'll eat it,' said Alice, `and if it makes me grow larger,
I can reach the key; and if it makes me grow smaller, I can creep
under the door; so either way I'll get into the garden, and I
don't care which happens!'

  She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, `Which
way?  Which way?', holding her hand on the top of her head to
feel which way it was growing, and she was quite surprised to
find that she remained the same size:  to be sure, this generally
happens when one eats cake, but Alice had got so much into the
way of expecting nothing but out-of-the-way things to happen,
that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go on in the
common way.

  So she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake.

     *       *       *       *       *       *       *

         *       *       *       *       *       *

     *       *       *       *       *       *       *




= CHAPTER II =
=( The Pool of Tears )=


  `Curiouser and curiouser!' cried Alice (she was so much
surprised, that for the moment she quite forgot how to speak good
English); `now I'm opening out like the largest telescope that
ever was!  Good-bye, feet!' (for when she looked down at her
feet, they seemed to be almost out of sight, they were getting so
far off).  `Oh, my poor little feet, I wonder who will put on
your shoes and stockings for you now, dears?  I'm sure _I_ shan't
be able!  I shall be a great deal too far off to trouble myself
about you:  you must manage the best way you can; --but I must be
kind to them,' thought Alice, `or perhaps they won't walk the
way I want to go!  Let me see:  I'll give them a new pair of
boots every Christmas.'

  And she went on planning to herself how she would manage it.
`They must go by the carrier,' she thought; `and how funny it'll
seem, sending presents to one's own feet!  And how odd the
directions will look!

            ALICE'S RIGHT FOOT, ESQ.
                HEARTHRUG,
                    NEAR THE FENDER,
                        (WITH ALICE'S LOVE).

Oh dear, what nonsense I'm talking!'

  Just then her head struck against the roof of the hall:  in
fact she was now more than nine feet high, and she at once took
up the little golden key and hurried off to the garden door.

  Poor Alice!  It was as much as she could do, lying down on one
side, to look through into the garden with one eye; but to get
through was more hopeless than ever:  she sat down and began to
cry again.

  `You ought to be ashamed of yourself,' said Alice, `a great
girl like you,' (she might well say this), `to go on crying in
this way!  Stop this moment, I tell you!'  But she went on all
the same, shedding gallons of tears, until there was a large pool
all round her, about four inches deep and reaching half down the
hall.

  After a time she heard a little pattering of feet in the
distance, and she hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming.
It was the White Rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with a
pair of white kid gloves in one hand and a large fan in the
other:  he came trotting along in a great hurry, muttering to
himself as he came, `Oh! the Duchess, the Duchess! Oh! won't she
be savage if I've kept her waiting!'  Alice felt so desperate
that she was ready to ask help of any one; so, when the Rabbit
came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, `If you please,
sir--'  The Rabbit started violently, dropped the white kid
gloves and the fan, and skurried away into the darkness as hard
as he could go.

  Alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very
hot, she kept fanning herself all the time she went on talking:
`Dear, dear!  How queer everything is to-day!  And yesterday
things went on just as usual.  I wonder if I've been changed in
the night?  Let me think:  was I the same when I got up this
morning?  I almost think I can remember feeling a little
different.  But if I'm not the same, the next question is, Who in
the world am I?  Ah, THAT'S the great puzzle!'  And she began
thinking over all the children she knew that were of the same age
as herself, to see if she could have been changed for any of
them.

  `I'm sure I'm not Ada,' she said, `for her hair goes in such
long ringlets, and mine doesn't go in ringlets at all; and I'm
sure I can't be Mabel, for I know all sorts of things, and she,
oh! she knows such a very little!  Besides, SHE'S she, and I'm I,
and--oh dear, how puzzling it all is!  I'll try if I know all the
things I used to know.  Let me see:  four times five is twelve,
and four times six is thirteen, and four times seven is--oh dear!
I shall never get to twenty at that rate!  However, the
Multiplication Table doesn't signify:  let's try Geography.
London is the capital of Paris, and Paris is the capital of Rome,
and Rome--no, THAT'S all wrong, I'm certain!  I must have been
changed for Mabel!  I'll try and say "How doth the little--"'
and she crossed her hands on her lap as if she were saying lessons,
and began to repeat it, but her voice sounded hoarse and
strange, and the words did not come the same as they used to do:--

            `How doth the little crocodile
              Improve his shining tail,
            And pour the waters of the Nile
              On every golden scale!

            `How cheerfully he seems to grin,
              How neatly spread his claws,
            And welcome little fishes in
              With gently smiling jaws!'

  `I'm sure those are not the right words,' said poor Alice, and
her eyes filled with tears again as she went on, `I must be Mabel
after all, and I shall have to go and live in that poky little
house, and have next to no toys to play with, and oh! ever so
many lessons to learn!  No, I've made up my mind about it; if I'm
Mabel, I'll stay down here!  It'll be no use their putting their
heads down and saying "Come up again, dear!"  I shall only look
up and say "Who am I then?  Tell me that first, and then, if I
like being that person, I'll come up:  if not, I'll stay down
here till I'm somebody else"--but, oh dear!' cried Alice, with a
sudden burst of tears, `I do wish they WOULD put their heads
down!  I am so VERY tired of being all alone here!'

  As she said this she looked down at her hands, and was
surprised to see that she had put on one of the Rabbit's little
white kid gloves while she was talking.  `How CAN I have done
that?' she thought.  `I must be growing small again.'  She got up
and went to the table to measure herself by it, and found that,
as nearly as she could guess, she was now about two feet high,
and was going on shrinking rapidly:  she soon found out that the
cause of this was the fan she was holding, and she dropped it
hastily, just in time to avoid shrinking away altogether.

`That WAS a narrow escape!' said Alice, a good deal frightened at
the sudden change, but very glad to find herself still in
existence; `and now for the garden!' and she ran with all speed
back to the little door:  but, alas! the little door was shut
again, and the little golden key was lying on the glass table as
before, `and things are worse than ever,' thought the poor child,
`for I never was so small as this before, never!  And I declare
it's too bad, that it is!'

  As she said these words her foot slipped, and in another
moment, splash! she was up to her chin in salt water.  Her first
idea was that she had somehow fallen into the sea, `and in that
case I can go back by railway,' she said to herself.  (Alice had
been to the seaside once in her life, and had come to the general
conclusion, that wherever you go to on the English coast you find
a number of bathing machines in the sea, some children digging in
the sand with wooden spades, then a row of lodging houses, and
behind them a railway station.)  However, she soon made out that
she was in the pool of tears which she had wept when she was nine
feet high.

  `I wish I hadn't cried so much!' said Alice, as she swam about,
trying to find her way out.  `I shall be punished for it now, I
suppose, by being drowned in my own tears!  That WILL be a queer
thing, to be sure!  However, everything is queer to-day.'

  Just then she heard something splashing about in the pool a
little way off, and she swam nearer to make out what it was:  at
first she thought it must be a walrus or hippopotamus, but then
she remembered how small she was now, and she soon made out that
it was only a mouse that had slipped in like herself.

  `Would it be of any use, now,' thought Alice, `to speak to this
mouse?  Everything is so out-of-the-way down here, that I should
think very likely it can talk:  at any rate, there's no harm in
trying.'  So she began:  `O Mouse, do you know the way out of
this pool?  I am very tired of swimming about here, O Mouse!'
(Alice thought this must be the right way of speaking to a mouse:
she had never done such a thing before, but she remembered having
seen in her brother's Latin Grammar, `A mouse--of a mouse--to a
mouse--a mouse--O mouse!')  The Mouse looked at her rather
inquisitively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little
eyes, but it said nothing.

  `Perhaps it doesn't understand English,' thought Alice; `I
daresay it's a French mouse, come over with William the
Conqueror.'  (For, with all her knowledge of history, Alice had
no very clear notion how long ago anything had happened.)  So she
began again:  `Ou est ma chatte?' which was the first sentence in
her French lesson-book.  The Mouse gave a sudden leap out of the
water, and seemed to quiver all over with fright.  `Oh, I beg
your pardon!' cried Alice hastily, afraid that she had hurt the
poor animal's feelings.  `I quite forgot you didn't like cats.'

  `Not like cats!' cried the Mouse, in a shrill, passionate
voice.  `Would YOU like cats if you were me?'

  `Well, perhaps not,' said Alice in a soothing tone:  `don't be
angry about it.  And yet I wish I could show you our cat Dinah:
I think you'd take a fancy to cats if you could only see her.
She is such a dear quiet thing,' Alice went on, half to herself,
as she swam lazily about in the pool, `and she sits purring so
nicely by the fire, licking her paws and washing her face--and
she is such a nice soft thing to nurse--and she's such a capital
one for catching mice--oh, I beg your pardon!' cried Alice again,
for this time the Mouse was bristling all over, and she felt
certain it must be really offended.  `We won't talk about her any
more if you'd rather not.'

  `We indeed!' cried the Mouse, who was trembling down to the end
of his tail.  `As if I would talk on such a subject!  Our family
always HATED cats:  nasty, low, vulgar things!  Don't let me hear
the name again!'

  `I won't indeed!' said Alice, in a great hurry to change the
subject of conversation.  `Are you--are you fond--of--of dogs?'
The Mouse did not answer, so Alice went on eagerly:  `There is
such a nice little dog near our house I should like to show you!
A little bright-eyed terrier, you know, with oh, such long curly
brown hair!  And it'll fetch things when you throw them, and
it'll sit up and beg for its dinner, and all sorts of things--I
can't remember half of them--and it belongs to a farmer, you
know, and he says it's so useful, it's worth a hundred pounds!
He says it kills all the rats and--oh dear!' cried Alice in a
sorrowful tone, `I'm afraid I've offended it again!'  For the
Mouse was swimming away from her as hard as it could go, and
making quite a commotion in the pool as it went.

  So she called softly after it, `Mouse dear!  Do come back
again, and we won't talk about cats or dogs either, if you don't
like them!'  When the Mouse heard this, it turned round and swam
slowly back to her:  its face was quite pale (with passion, Alice
thought), and it said in a low trembling voice, `Let us get to
the shore, and then I'll tell you my history, and you'll
understand why it is I hate cats and dogs.'

  It was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite crowded
with the birds and animals that had fallen into it:  there were a
Duck and a Dodo, a Lory and an Eaglet, and several other curious
creatures.  Alice led the way, and the whole party swam to the
shore.



= CHAPTER III =
=( A Caucus-Race and a Long Tale )=


  They were indeed a queer-looking party that assembled on the
bank--the birds with draggled feathers, the animals with their
fur clinging close to them, and all dripping wet, cross, and
uncomfortable.

  The first question of course was, how to get dry again:  they
had a consultation about this, and after a few minutes it seemed
quite natural to Alice to find herself talking familiarly with
them, as if she had known them all her life.  Indeed, she had
quite a long argument with the Lory, who at last turned sulky,
and would only say, `I am older than you, and must know better';
and this Alice would not allow without knowing how old it was,
and, as the Lory positively refused to tell its age, there was no
more to be said.

  At last the Mouse, who seemed to be a person of authority among
them, called out, `Sit down, all of you, and listen to me!  I'LL
soon make you dry enough!'  They all sat down at once, in a large
ring, with the Mouse in the middle.  Alice kept her eyes
anxiously fixed on it, for she felt sure she would catch a bad
cold if she did not get dry very soon.

  `Ahem!' said the Mouse with an important air, `are you all ready?
This is the driest thing I know.  Silence all round, if you please!
"William the Conqueror, whose cause was favoured by the pope, was
soon submitted to by the English, who wanted leaders, and had been
of late much accustomed to usurpation and conquest.  Edwin and
Morcar, the earls of Mercia and Northumbria--"'

  `Ugh!' said the Lory, with a shiver.

  `I beg your pardon!' said the Mouse, frowning, but very
politely:  `Did you speak?'

  `Not I!' said the Lory hastily.

  `I thought you did,' said the Mouse.  `--I proceed.  "Edwin and
Morcar, the earls of Mercia and Northumbria, declared for him:
and even Stigand, the patriotic archbishop of Canterbury, found
it advisable--"'

  `Found WHAT?' said the Duck.

  `Found IT,' the Mouse replied rather crossly:  `of course you
know what "it" means.'

  `I know what "it" means well enough, when I find a thing,' said
the Duck:  `it's generally a frog or a worm.  The question is,
what did the archbishop find?'

  The Mouse did not notice this question, but hurriedly went on,
`"--found it advisable to go with Edgar Atheling to meet William
and offer him the crown.  William's conduct at first was
moderate.  But the insolence of his Normans--"  How are you
getting on now, my dear?' it continued, turning to Alice as it
spoke.

  `As wet as ever,' said Alice in a melancholy tone:  `it doesn't
seem to dry me at all.'

  `In that case,' said the Dodo solemnly, rising to its feet, `I
move that the meeting adjourn, for the immediate adoption of more
energetic remedies--'

  `Speak English!' said the Eaglet.  `I don't know the meaning of
half those long words, and, what's more, I don't believe you do
either!'  And the Eaglet bent down its head to hide a smile:
some of the other birds tittered audibly.

  `What I was going to say,' said the Dodo in an offended tone,
`was, that the best thing to get us dry would be a Caucus-race.'

  `What IS a Caucus-race?' said Alice; not that she wanted much
to know, but the Dodo had paused as if it thought that SOMEBODY
ought to speak, and no one else seemed inclined to say anything.

  `Why,' said the Dodo, `the best way to explain it is to do it.'
(And, as you might like to try the thing yourself, some winter
day, I will tell you how the Dodo managed it.)

  First it marked out a race-course, in a sort of circle, (`the
exact shape doesn't matter,' it said,) and then all the party
were placed along the course, here and there.  There was no `One,
two, three, and away,' but they began running when they liked,
and left off when they liked, so that it was not easy to know
when the race was over.  However, when they had been running half
an hour or so, and were quite dry again, the Dodo suddenly called
out `The race is over!' and they all crowded round it, panting,
and asking, `But who has won?'

  This question the Dodo could not answer without a great deal of
thought, and it sat for a long time with one finger pressed upon
its forehead (the position in which you usually see Shakespeare,
in the pictures of him), while the rest waited in silence.  At
last the Dodo said, `EVERYBODY has won, and all must have
prizes.'

  `But who is to give the prizes?' quite a chorus of voices
asked.

  `Why, SHE, of course,' said the Dodo, pointing to Alice with
one finger; and the whole party at once crowded round her,
calling out in a confused way, `Prizes! Prizes!'

  Alice had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her hand
in her pocket, and pulled out a box of comfits, (luckily the salt
water had not got into it), and handed them round as prizes.
There was exactly one a-piece all round.

  `But she must have a prize herself, you know,' said the Mouse.

  `Of course,' the Dodo replied very gravely.  `What else have
you got in your pocket?' he went on, turning to Alice.

  `Only a thimble,' said Alice sadly.

  `Hand it over here,' said the Dodo.

  Then they all crowded round her once more, while the Dodo
solemnly presented the thimble, saying `We beg your acceptance of
this elegant thimble'; and, when it had finished this short
speech, they all cheered.

  Alice thought the whole thing very absurd, but they all looked
so grave that she did not dare to laugh; and, as she could not
think of anything to say, she simply bowed, and took the thimble,
looking as solemn as she could.

  The next thing was to eat the comfits:  this caused some noise
and confusion, as the large birds complained that they could not
taste theirs, and the small ones choked and had to be patted on
the back.  However, it was over at last, and they sat down again
in a ring, and begged the Mouse to tell them something more.

  `You promised to tell me your history, you know,' said Alice,
`and why it is you hate--C and D,' she added in a whisper, half
afraid that it would be offended again.

  `Mine is a long and a sad tale!' said the Mouse, turning to
Alice, and sighing.

  `It IS a long tail, certainly,' said Alice, looking down with
wonder at the Mouse's tail; `but why do you call it sad?'  And
she kept on puzzling about it while the Mouse was speaking, so
that her idea of the tale was something like this:--

                    `Fury said to a
                   mouse, That he
                 met in the
               house,
            "Let us
              both go to
                law:  I will
                  prosecute
                    YOU.  --Come,
                       I'll take no
                        denial; We
                     must have a
                 trial:  For
              really this
           morning I've
          nothing
         to do."
           Said the
             mouse to the
               cur, "Such
                 a trial,
                   dear Sir,
                         With
                     no jury
                  or judge,
                would be
              wasting
             our
              breath."
               "I'll be
                 judge, I'll
                   be jury,"
                         Said
                    cunning
                      old Fury:
                     "I'll
                      try the
                         whole
                          cause,
                             and
                        condemn
                       you
                      to
                       death."'


  `You are not attending!' said the Mouse to Alice severely.
`What are you thinking of?'

  `I beg your pardon,' said Alice very humbly:  `you had got to
the fifth bend, I think?'

  `I had NOT!' cried the Mouse, sharply and very angrily.

  `A knot!' said Alice, always ready to make herself useful, and
looking anxiously about her.  `Oh, do let me help to undo it!'

  `I shall do nothing of the sort,' said the Mouse, getting up
and walking away.  `You insult me by talking such nonsense!'

  `I didn't mean it!' pleaded poor Alice.  `But you're so easily
offended, you know!'

  The Mouse only growled in reply.

  `Please come back and finish your story!' Alice called after
it; and the others all joined in chorus, `Yes, please do!' but
the Mouse only shook its head impatiently, and walked a little
quicker.

  `What a pity it wouldn't stay!' sighed the Lory, as soon as it
was quite out of sight; and an old Crab took the opportunity of
saying to her daughter `Ah, my dear!  Let this be a lesson to you
never to lose YOUR temper!'  `Hold your tongue, Ma!' said the
young Crab, a little snappishly.  `You're enough to try the
patience of an oyster!'

  `I wish I had our Dinah here, I know I do!' said Alice aloud,
addressing nobody in particular.  `She'd soon fetch it back!'

  `And who is Dinah, if I might venture to ask the question?'
said the Lory.

  Alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about
her pet:  `Dinah's our cat.  And she's such a capital one for
catching mice you can't think!  And oh, I wish you could see her
after the birds!  Why, she'll eat a little bird as soon as look
at it!'

  This speech caused a remarkable sensation among the party.
Some of the birds hurried off at once:  one old Magpie began
wrapping itself up very carefully, remarking, `I really must be
getting home; the night-air doesn't suit my throat!' and a Canary
called out in a trembling voice to its children, `Come away, my
dears!  It's high time you were all in bed!'  On various pretexts
they all moved off, and Alice was soon left alone.

  `I wish I hadn't mentioned Dinah!' she said to herself in a
melancholy tone.  `Nobody seems to like her, down here, and I'm
sure she's the best cat in the world!  Oh, my dear Dinah!  I
wonder if I shall ever see you any more!'  And here poor Alice
began to cry again, for she felt very lonely and low-spirited.
In a little while, however, she again heard a little pattering of
footsteps in the distance, and she looked up eagerly, half hoping
that the Mouse had changed his mind, and was coming back to
finish his story.



= CHAPTER IV =
=( The Rabbit Sends in a Little Bill )=


  It was the White Rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and
looking anxiously about as it went, as if it had lost something;
and she heard it muttering to itself `The Duchess!  The Duchess!
Oh my dear paws!  Oh my fur and whiskers!  She'll get me
executed, as sure as ferrets are ferrets!  Where CAN I have
dropped them, I wonder?'  Alice guessed in a moment that it was
looking for the fan and the pair of white kid gloves, and she
very good-naturedly began hunting about for them, but they were
nowhere to be seen--everything seemed to have changed since her
swim in the pool, and the great hall, with the glass table and
the little door, had vanished completely.

  Very soon the Rabbit noticed Alice, as she went hunting about,
and called out to her in an angry tone, `Why, Mary Ann, what ARE
you doing out here?  Run home this moment, and fetch me a pair of
gloves and a fan!  Quick, now!'  And Alice was so much frightened
that she ran off at once in the direction it pointed to, without
trying to explain the mistake it had made.

  `He took me for his housemaid,' she said to herself as she ran.
`How surprised he'll be when he finds out who I am!  But I'd
better take him his fan and gloves--that is, if I can find them.'
As she said this, she came upon a neat little house, on the door
of which was a bright brass plate with the name `W. RABBIT'
engraved upon it.  She went in without knocking, and hurried
upstairs, in great fear lest she should meet the real Mary Ann,
and be turned out of the house before she had found the fan and
gloves.

  `How queer it seems,' Alice said to herself, `to be going
messages for a rabbit!  I suppose Dinah'll be sending me on
messages next!'  And she began fancying the sort of thing that
would happen:  `"Miss Alice!  Come here directly, and get ready
for your walk!" "Coming in a minute, nurse!  But I've got to see
that the mouse doesn't get out."  Only I don't think,' Alice went
on, `that they'd let Dinah stop in the house if it began ordering
people about like that!'

  By this time she had found her way into a tidy little room with
a table in the window, and on it (as she had hoped) a fan and two
or three pairs of tiny white kid gloves:  she took up the fan and
a pair of the gloves, and was just going to leave the room, when
her eye fell upon a little bottle that stood near the looking-
glass.  There was no label this time with the words `DRINK ME,'
but nevertheless she uncorked it and put it to her lips.  `I know
SOMETHING interesting is sure to happen,' she said to herself,
`whenever I eat or drink anything; so I'll just see what this
bottle does.  I do hope it'll make me grow large again, for
really I'm quite tired of being such a tiny little thing!'

  It did so indeed, and much sooner than she had expected:
before she had drunk half the bottle, she found her head pressing
against the ceiling, and had to stoop to save her neck from being
broken.  She hastily put down the bottle, saying to herself
`That's quite enough--I hope I shan't grow any more--As it is, I
can't get out at the door--I do wish I hadn't drunk quite so
much!'

  Alas! it was too late to wish that!  She went on growing, and
growing, and very soon had to kneel down on the floor:  in
another minute there was not even room for this, and she tried
the effect of lying down with one elbow against the door, and the
other arm curled round her head.  Still she went on growing, and,
as a last resource, she put one arm out of the window, and one
foot up the chimney, and said to herself `Now I can do no more,
whatever happens.  What WILL become of me?'

  Luckily for Alice, the little magic bottle had now had its full
effect, and she grew no larger:  still it was very uncomfortable,
and, as there seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever getting
out of the room again, no wonder she felt unhappy.

  `It was much pleasanter at home,' thought poor Alice, `when one
wasn't always growing larger and smaller, and being ordered about
by mice and rabbits.  I almost wish I hadn't gone down that
rabbit-hole--and yet--and yet--it's rather curious, you know,
this sort of life!  I do wonder what CAN have happened to me!
When I used to read fairy-tales, I fancied that kind of thing
never happened, and now here I am in the middle of one!  There
ought to be a book written about me, that there ought!  And when
I grow up, I'll write one--but I'm grown up now,' she added in a
sorrowful tone; `at least there's no room to grow up any more
HERE.'

  `But then,' thought Alice, `shall I NEVER get any older than I
am now?  That'll be a comfort, one way--never to be an old woman--
but then--always to have lessons to learn!  Oh, I shouldn't like THAT!'

  `Oh, you foolish Alice!' she answered herself.  `How can you
learn lessons in here?  Why, there's hardly room for YOU, and no
room at all for any lesson-books!'

  And so she went on, taking first one side and then the other,
and making quite a conversation of it altogether; but after a few
minutes she heard a voice outside, and stopped to listen.

  `Mary Ann!  Mary Ann!' said the voice.  `Fetch me my gloves
this moment!'  Then came a little pattering of feet on the
stairs.  Alice knew it was the Rabbit coming to look for her, and
she trembled till she shook the house, quite forgetting that she
was now about a thousand times as large as the Rabbit, and had no
reason to be afraid of it.

  Presently the Rabbit came up to the door, and tried to open it;
but, as the door opened inwards, and Alice's elbow was pressed
hard against it, that attempt proved a failure.  Alice heard it
say to itself `Then I'll go round and get in at the window.'

  `THAT you won't' thought Alice, and, after waiting till she
fancied she heard the Rabbit just under the window, she suddenly
spread out her hand, and made a snatch in the air.  She did not
get hold of anything, but she heard a little shriek and a fall,
and a crash of broken glass, from which she concluded that it was
just possible it had fallen into a cucumber-frame, or something
of the sort.

  Next came an angry voice--the Rabbit's--`Pat! Pat!  Where are
you?'  And then a voice she had never heard before, `Sure then
I'm here!  Digging for apples, yer honour!'

  `Digging for apples, indeed!' said the Rabbit angrily.  `Here!
Come and help me out of THIS!'  (Sounds of more broken glass.)

  `Now tell me, Pat, what's that in the window?'

  `Sure, it's an arm, yer honour!'  (He pronounced it `arrum.')

  `An arm, you goose!   Who ever saw one that size?  Why, it
fills the whole window!'

  `Sure, it does, yer honour:  but it's an arm for all that.'

  `Well, it's got no business there, at any rate:  go and take it
away!'

  There was a long silence after this, and Alice could only hear
whispers now and then; such as, `Sure, I don't like it, yer
honour, at all, at all!'  `Do as I tell you, you coward!' and at
last she spread out her hand again, and made another snatch in
the air.  This time there were TWO little shrieks, and more
sounds of broken glass.  `What a number of cucumber-frames there
must be!' thought Alice.  `I wonder what they'll do next!  As for
pulling me out of the window, I only wish they COULD!  I'm sure I
don't want to stay in here any longer!'

  She waited for some time without hearing anything more:  at
last came a rumbling of little cartwheels, and the sound of a
good many voices all talking together:  she made out the words:
`Where's the other ladder?--Why, I hadn't to bring but one;
Bill's got the other--Bill! fetch it here, lad!--Here, put 'em up
at this corner--No, tie 'em together first--they don't reach half
high enough yet--Oh! they'll do well enough; don't be particular--
Here, Bill! catch hold of this rope--Will the roof bear?--Mind
that loose slate--Oh, it's coming down!  Heads below!' (a loud
crash)--`Now, who did that?--It was Bill, I fancy--Who's to go
down the chimney?--Nay, I shan't! YOU do it!--That I won't,
then!--Bill's to go down--Here, Bill! the master says you're to
go down the chimney!'

  `Oh! So Bill's got to come down the chimney, has he?' said
Alice to herself.  `Shy, they seem to put everything upon Bill!
I wouldn't be in Bill's place for a good deal:  this fireplace is
narrow, to be sure; but I THINK I can kick a little!'

  She drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could, and
waited till she heard a little animal (she couldn't guess of what
sort it was) scratching and scrambling about in the chimney close
above her:  then, saying to herself `This is Bill,' she gave one
sharp kick, and waited to see what would happen next.

  The first thing she heard was a general chorus of `There goes
Bill!' then the Rabbit's voice along--`Catch him, you by the
hedge!' then silence, and then another confusion of voices--`Hold
up his head--Brandy now--Don't choke him--How was it, old fellow?
What happened to you?  Tell us all about it!'

  Last came a little feeble, squeaking voice, (`That's Bill,'
thought Alice,) `Well, I hardly know--No more, thank ye; I'm
better now--but I'm a deal too flustered to tell you--all I know
is, something comes at me like a Jack-in-the-box, and up I goes
like a sky-rocket!'

  `So you did, old fellow!' said the others.

  `We must burn the house down!' said the Rabbit's voice; and
Alice called out as loud as she could, `If you do.  I'll set
Dinah at you!'

  There was a dead silence instantly, and Alice thought to
herself, `I wonder what they WILL do next!  If they had any
sense, they'd take the roof off.'  After a minute or two, they
began moving about again, and Alice heard the Rabbit say, `A
barrowful will do, to begin with.'

  `A barrowful of WHAT?' thought Alice; but she had not long to
doubt, for the next moment a shower of little pebbles came
rattling in at the window, and some of them hit her in the face.
`I'll put a stop to this,' she said to herself, and shouted out,
`You'd better not do that again!' which produced another dead
silence.

  Alice noticed with some surprise that the pebbles were all
turning into little cakes as they lay on the floor, and a bright
idea came into her head.  `If I eat one of these cakes,' she
thought, `it's sure to make SOME change in my size; and as it
can't possibly make me larger, it must make me smaller, I
suppose.'

  So she swallowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to find
that she began shrinking directly.  As soon as she was small
enough to get through the door, she ran out of the house, and
found quite a crowd of little animals and birds waiting outside.
The poor little Lizard, Bill, was in the middle, being held up by
two guinea-pigs, who were giving it something out of a bottle.
They all made a rush at Alice the moment she appeared; but she
ran off as hard as she could, and soon found herself safe in a
thick wood.

  `The first thing I've got to do,' said Alice to herself, as she
wandered about in the wood, `is to grow to my right size again;
and the second thing is to find my way into that lovely garden.
I think that will be the best plan.'

  It sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and
simply arranged; the only difficulty was, that she had not the
smallest idea how to set about it; and while she was peering
about anxiously among the trees, a little sharp bark just over
her head made her look up in a great hurry.

  An enormous puppy was looking down at her with large round
eyes, and feebly stretching out one paw, trying to touch her.
`Poor little thing!' said Alice, in a coaxing tone, and she tried
hard to whistle to it; but she was terribly frightened all the
time at the thought that it might be hungry, in which case it
would be very likely to eat her up in spite of all her coaxing.

  Hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a little bit of
stick, and held it out to the puppy; whereupon the puppy jumped
into the air off all its feet at once, with a yelp of delight,
and rushed at the stick, and made believe to worry it; then Alice
dodged behind a great thistle, to keep herself from being run
over; and the moment she appeared on the other side, the puppy
made another rush at the stick, and tumbled head over heels in
its hurry to get hold of it; then Alice, thinking it was very
like having a game of play with a cart-horse, and expecting every
moment to be trampled under its feet, ran round the thistle
again; then the puppy began a series of short charges at the
stick, running a very little way forwards each time and a long
way back, and barking hoarsely all the while, till at last it sat
down a good way off, panting, with its tongue hanging out of its
mouth, and its great eyes half shut.

  This seemed to Alice a good opportunity for making her escape;
so she set off at once, and ran till she was quite tired and out
of breath, and till the puppy's bark sounded quite faint in the
distance.

  `And yet what a dear little puppy it was!' said Alice, as she
leant against a buttercup to rest herself, and fanned herself
with one of the leaves:  `I should have liked teaching it tricks
very much, if--if I'd only been the right size to do it!  Oh
dear!  I'd nearly forgotten that I've got to grow up again!  Let
me see--how IS it to be managed?  I suppose I ought to eat or
drink something or other; but the great question is, what?'

  The great question certainly was, what?  Alice looked all round
her at the flowers and the blades of grass, but she did not see
anything that looked like the right thing to eat or drink under
the circumstances.  There was a large mushroom growing near her,
about the same height as herself; and when she had looked under
it, and on both sides of it, and behind it, it occurred to her
that she might as well look and see what was on the top of it.

  She stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped over the edge of
the mushroom, and her eyes immediately met those of a large
caterpillar, that was sitting on the top with its arms folded,
quietly smoking a long hookah, and taking not the smallest notice
of her or of anything else.



= CHAPTER V =
=( Advice from a Caterpillar )=


  The Caterpillar and Alice looked at each other for some time in
silence:  at last the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its
mouth, and addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice.

  `Who are YOU?' said the Caterpillar.

  This was not an encouraging opening for a conversation.  Alice
replied, rather shyly, `I--I hardly know, sir, just at present--
at least I know who I WAS when I got up this morning, but I think
I must have been changed several times since then.'

  `What do you mean by that?' said the Caterpillar sternly.
`Explain yourself!'

  `I can't explain MYSELF, I'm afraid, sir' said Alice, `because
I'm not myself, you see.'

  `I don't see,' said the Caterpillar.

  `I'm afraid I can't put it more clearly,' Alice replied very
politely, `for I can't understand it myself to begin with; and
being so many different sizes in a day is very confusing.'

  `It isn't,' said the Caterpillar.

  `Well, perhaps you haven't found it so yet,' said Alice; `but
when you have to turn into a chrysalis--you will some day, you
know--and then after that into a butterfly, I should think you'll
feel it a little queer, won't you?'

  `Not a bit,' said the Caterpillar.

  `Well, perhaps your feelings may be different,' said Alice;
`all I know is, it would feel very queer to ME.'

  `You!' said the Caterpillar contemptuously.  `Who are YOU?'

  Which brought them back again to the beginning of the
conversation.  Alice felt a little irritated at the Caterpillar's
making such VERY short remarks, and she drew herself up and said,
very gravely, `I think, you ought to tell me who YOU are, first.'

  `Why?' said the Caterpillar.

  Here was another puzzling question; and as Alice could not
think of any good reason, and as the Caterpillar seemed to be in
a VERY unpleasant state of mind, she turned away.

  `Come back!' the Caterpillar called after her.  `I've something
important to say!'

  This sounded promising, certainly:  Alice turned and came back
again.

  `Keep your temper,' said the Caterpillar.

  `Is that all?' said Alice, swallowing down her anger as well as
she could.

  `No,' said the Caterpillar.

  Alice thought she might as well wait, as she had nothing else
to do, and perhaps after all it might tell her something worth
hearing.  For some minutes it puffed away without speaking, but
at last it unfolded its arms, took the hookah out of its mouth
again, and said, `So you think you're changed, do you?'

  `I'm afraid I am, sir,' said Alice; `I can't remember things as
I used--and I don't keep the same size for ten minutes together!'

  `Can't remember WHAT things?' said the Caterpillar.

  `Well, I've tried to say "HOW DOTH THE LITTLE BUSY BEE," but it
all came different!' Alice replied in a very melancholy voice.

  `Repeat, "YOU ARE OLD, FATHER WILLIAM,"' said the Caterpillar.

  Alice folded her hands, and began:--

    `You are old, Father William,' the young man said,
      `And your hair has become very white;
    And yet you incessantly stand on your head--
      Do you think, at your age, it is right?'

    `In my youth,' Father William replied to his son,
      `I feared it might injure the brain;
    But, now that I'm perfectly sure I have none,
      Why, I do it again and again.'

    `You are old,' said the youth, `as I mentioned before,
      And have grown most uncommonly fat;
    Yet you turned a back-somersault in at the door--
      Pray, what is the reason of that?'

    `In my youth,' said the sage, as he shook his grey locks,
      `I kept all my limbs very supple
    By the use of this ointment--one shilling the box--
      Allow me to sell you a couple?'

    `You are old,' said the youth, `and your jaws are too weak
      For anything tougher than suet;
    Yet you finished the goose, with the bones and the beak--
      Pray how did you manage to do it?'

    `In my youth,' said his father, `I took to the law,
      And argued each case with my wife;
    And the muscular strength, which it gave to my jaw,
      Has lasted the rest of my life.'

    `You are old,' said the youth, `one would hardly suppose
      That your eye was as steady as ever;
    Yet you balanced an eel on the end of your nose--
      What made you so awfully clever?'

    `I have answered three questions, and that is enough,'
      Said his father; `don't give yourself airs!
    Do you think I can listen all day to such stuff?
      Be off, or I'll kick you down stairs!'


  `That is not said right,' said the Caterpillar.

  `Not QUITE right, I'm afraid,' said Alice, timidly; `some of the
words have got altered.'

  `It is wrong from beginning to end,' said the Caterpillar
decidedly, and there was silence for some minutes.

  The Caterpillar was the first to speak.

  `What size do you want to be?' it asked.

  `Oh, I'm not particular as to size,' Alice hastily replied;
`only one doesn't like changing so often, you know.'

  `I DON'T know,' said the Caterpillar.

  Alice said nothing:  she had never been so much contradicted in
her life before, and she felt that she was losing her temper.

  `Are you content now?' said the Caterpillar.

  `Well, I should like to be a LITTLE larger, sir, if you
wouldn't mind,' said Alice:  `three inches is such a wretched
height to be.'

  `It is a very good height indeed!' said the Caterpillar
angrily, rearing itself upright as it spoke (it was exactly three
inches high).

  `But I'm not used to it!' pleaded poor Alice in a piteous tone.
And she thought of herself, `I wish the creatures wouldn't be so
easily offended!'

  `You'll get used to it in time,' said the Caterpillar; and it
put the hookah into its mouth and began smoking again.

  This time Alice waited patiently until it chose to speak again.
In a minute or two the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its
mouth and yawned once or twice, and shook itself.  Then it got
down off the mushroom, and crawled away in the grass, merely
remarking as it went, `One side will make you grow taller, and
the other side will make you grow shorter.'

  `One side of WHAT?  The other side of WHAT?' thought Alice to
herself.

  `Of the mushroom,' said the Caterpillar, just as if she had
asked it aloud; and in another moment it was out of sight.

  Alice remained looking thoughtfully at the mushroom for a
minute, trying to make out which were the two sides of it; and as
it was perfectly round, she found this a very difficult question.
However, at last she stretched her arms round it as far as they
would go, and broke off a bit of the edge with each hand.

  `And now which is which?' she said to herself, and nibbled a
little of the right-hand bit to try the effect:  the next moment
she felt a violent blow underneath her chin:  it had struck her
foot!

  She was a good deal frightened by this very sudden change, but
she felt that there was no time to be lost, as she was shrinking
rapidly; so she set to work at once to eat some of the other bit.
Her chin was pressed so closely against her foot, that there was
hardly room to open her mouth; but she did it at last, and
managed to swallow a morsel of the lefthand bit.


     *       *       *       *       *       *       *

         *       *       *       *       *       *

     *       *       *       *       *       *       *

  `Come, my head's free at last!' said Alice in a tone of
delight, which changed into alarm in another moment, when she
found that her shoulders were nowhere to be found:  all she could
see, when she looked down, was an immense length of neck, which
seemed to rise like a stalk out of a sea of green leaves that lay
far below her.

  `What CAN all that green stuff be?' said Alice.  `And where
HAVE my shoulders got to?  And oh, my poor hands, how is it I
can't see you?'  She was moving them about as she spoke, but no
result seemed to follow, except a little shaking among the
distant green leaves.

  As there seemed to be no chance of getting her hands up to her
head, she tried to get her head down to them, and was delighted
to find that her neck would bend about easily in any direction,
like a serpent.  She had just succeeded in curving it down into a
graceful zigzag, and was going to dive in among the leaves, which
she found to be nothing but the tops of the trees under which she
had been wandering, when a sharp hiss made her draw back in a
hurry:  a large pigeon had flown into her face, and was beating
her violently with its wings.

  `Serpent!' screamed the Pigeon.

  `I'm NOT a serpent!' said Alice indignantly.  `Let me alone!'

  `Serpent, I say again!' repeated the Pigeon, but in a more
subdued tone, and added with a kind of sob, `I've tried every
way, and nothing seems to suit them!'

  `I haven't the least idea what you're talking about,' said
Alice.

  `I've tried the roots of trees, and I've tried banks, and I've
tried hedges,' the Pigeon went on, without attending to her; `but
those serpents!  There's no pleasing them!'

  Alice was more and more puzzled, but she thought there was no
use in saying anything more till the Pigeon had finished.

  `As if it wasn't trouble enough hatching the eggs,' said the
Pigeon; `but I must be on the look-out for serpents night and
day!  Why, I haven't had a wink of sleep these three weeks!'

  `I'm very sorry you've been annoyed,' said Alice, who was
beginning to see its meaning.

  `And just as I'd taken the highest tree in the wood,' continued
the Pigeon, raising its voice to a shriek, `and just as I was
thinking I should be free of them at last, they must needs come
wriggling down from the sky!  Ugh, Serpent!'

  `But I'm NOT a serpent, I tell you!' said Alice.  `I'm a--I'm
a--'

  `Well!  WHAT are you?' said the Pigeon.  `I can see you're
trying to invent something!'

  `I--I'm a little girl,' said Alice, rather doubtfully, as she
remembered the number of changes she had gone through that day.

  `A likely story indeed!' said the Pigeon in a tone of the
deepest contempt.  `I've seen a good many little girls in my
time, but never ONE with such a neck as that!  No, no!  You're a
serpent; and there's no use denying it.  I suppose you'll be
telling me next that you never tasted an egg!'

  `I HAVE tasted eggs, certainly,' said Alice, who was a very
truthful child; `but little girls eat eggs quite as much as
serpents do, you know.'

  `I don't believe it,' said the Pigeon; `but if they do, why
then they're a kind of serpent, that's all I can say.'

  This was such a new idea to Alice, that she was quite silent
for a minute or two, which gave the Pigeon the opportunity of
adding, `You're looking for eggs, I know THAT well enough; and
what does it matter to me whether you're a little girl or a
serpent?'

  `It matters a good deal to ME,' said Alice hastily; `but I'm
not looking for eggs, as it happens; and if I was, I shouldn't
want YOURS:  I don't like them raw.'

  `Well, be off, then!' said the Pigeon in a sulky tone, as it
settled down again into its nest.  Alice crouched down among the
trees as well as she could, for her neck kept getting entangled
among the branches, and every now and then she had to stop and
untwist it.  After a while she remembered that she still held the
pieces of mushroom in her hands, and she set to work very
carefully, nibbling first at one and then at the other, and
growing sometimes taller and sometimes shorter, until she had
succeeded in bringing herself down to her usual height.

  It was so long since she had been anything near the right size,
that it felt quite strange at first; but she got used to it in a
few minutes, and began talking to herself, as usual.  `Come,
there's half my plan done now!  How puzzling all these changes
are!  I'm never sure what I'm going to be, from one minute to
another!  However, I've got back to my right size:  the next
thing is, to get into that beautiful garden--how IS that to be
done, I wonder?'  As she said this, she came suddenly upon an
open place, with a little house in it about four feet high.
`Whoever lives there,' thought Alice, `it'll never do to come
upon them THIS size:  why, I should frighten them out of their
wits!'  So she began nibbling at the righthand bit again, and did
not venture to go near the house till she had brought herself
down to nine inches high.



= CHAPTER VI =
=( Pig and Pepper )=


  For a minute or two she stood looking at the house, and
wondering what to do next, when suddenly a footman in livery came
running out of the wood--(she considered him to be a footman
because he was in livery:  otherwise, judging by his face only,
she would have called him a fish)--and rapped loudly at the door
with his knuckles.  It was opened by another footman in livery,
with a round face, and large eyes like a frog; and both footmen,
Alice noticed, had powdered hair that curled all over their
heads.  She felt very curious to know what it was all about, and
crept a little way out of the wood to listen.

  The Fish-Footman began by producing from under his arm a great
letter, nearly as large as himself, and this he handed over to
the other, saying, in a solemn tone, `For the Duchess.  An
invitation from the Queen to play croquet.'  The Frog-Footman
repeated, in the same solemn tone, only changing the order of the
words a little, `From the Queen.  An invitation for the Duchess
to play croquet.'

  Then they both bowed low, and their curls got entangled
together.

  Alice laughed so much at this, that she had to run back into
the wood for fear of their hearing her; and when she next peeped
out the Fish-Footman was gone, and the other was sitting on the
ground near the door, staring stupidly up into the sky.

  Alice went timidly up to the door, and knocked.

  `There's no sort of use in knocking,' said the Footman, `and
that for two reasons.  First, because I'm on the same side of the
door as you are; secondly, because they're making such a noise
inside, no one could possibly hear you.'  And certainly there was
a most extraordinary noise going on within--a constant howling
and sneezing, and every now and then a great crash, as if a dish
or kettle had been broken to pieces.

  `Please, then,' said Alice, `how am I to get in?'

  `There might be some sense in your knocking,' the Footman went
on without attending to her, `if we had the door between us.  For
instance, if you were INSIDE, you might knock, and I could let
you out, you know.'  He was looking up into the sky all the time
he was speaking, and this Alice thought decidedly uncivil.  `But
perhaps he can't help it,' she said to herself; `his eyes are so
VERY nearly at the top of his head.  But at any rate he might
answer questions.--How am I to get in?' she repeated, aloud.

  `I shall sit here,' the Footman remarked, `till tomorrow--'

  At this moment the door of the house opened, and a large plate
came skimming out, straight at the Footman's head:  it just
grazed his nose, and broke to pieces against one of the trees
behind him.

  `--or next day, maybe,' the Footman continued in the same tone,
exactly as if nothing had happened.

  `How am I to get in?' asked Alice again, in a louder tone.

  `ARE you to get in at all?' said the Footman.  `That's the
first question, you know.'

  It was, no doubt:  only Alice did not like to be told so.
`It's really dreadful,' she muttered to herself, `the way all the
creatures argue.  It's enough to drive one crazy!'

  The Footman seemed to think this a good opportunity for
repeating his remark, with variations.  `I shall sit here,' he
said, `on and off, for days and days.'

  `But what am I to do?' said Alice.

  `Anything you like,' said the Footman, and began whistling.

  `Oh, there's no use in talking to him,' said Alice desperately:
`he's perfectly idiotic!'  And she opened the door and went in.

  The door led right into a large kitchen, which was full of
smoke from one end to the other:  the Duchess was sitting on a
three-legged stool in the middle, nursing a baby; the cook was
leaning over the fire, stirring a large cauldron which seemed to
be full of soup.

  `There's certainly too much pepper in that soup!' Alice said to
herself, as well as she could for sneezing.

  There was certainly too much of it in the air.  Even the
Duchess sneezed occasionally; and as for the baby, it was
sneezing and howling alternately without a moment's pause.  The
only things in the kitchen that did not sneeze, were the cook,
and a large cat which was sitting on the hearth and grinning from
ear to ear.

  `Please would you tell me,' said Alice, a little timidly, for
she was not quite sure whether it was good manners for her to
speak first, `why your cat grins like that?'

  `It's a Cheshire cat,' said the Duchess, `and that's why.  Pig!'

  She said the last word with such sudden violence that Alice
quite jumped; but she saw in another moment that it was addressed
to the baby, and not to her, so she took courage, and went on
again:--

  `I didn't know that Cheshire cats always grinned; in fact, I
didn't know that cats COULD grin.'

  `They all can,' said the Duchess; `and most of 'em do.'

  `I don't know of any that do,' Alice said very politely,
feeling quite pleased to have got into a conversation.

  `You don't know much,' said the Duchess; `and that's a fact.'

  Alice did not at all like the tone of this remark, and thought
it would be as well to introduce some other subject of
conversation.  While she was trying to fix on one, the cook took
the cauldron of soup off the fire, and at once set to work
throwing everything within her reach at the Duchess and the baby
--the fire-irons came first; then followed a shower of saucepans,
plates, and dishes.  The Duchess took no notice of them even when
they hit her; and the baby was howling so much already, that it
was quite impossible to say whether the blows hurt it or not.

  `Oh, PLEASE mind what you're doing!' cried Alice, jumping up
and down in an agony of terror.  `Oh, there goes his PRECIOUS
nose'; as an unusually large saucepan flew close by it, and very
nearly carried it off.

  `If everybody minded their own business,' the Duchess said in a
hoarse growl, `the world would go round a deal faster than it
does.'

  `Which would NOT be an advantage,' said Alice, who felt very
glad to get an opportunity of showing off a little of her
knowledge.  `Just think of what work it would make with the day
and night!  You see the earth takes twenty-four hours to turn
round on its axis--'

  `Talking of axes,' said the Duchess, `chop off her head!'

  Alice glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to see if she meant
to take the hint; but the cook was busily stirring the soup, and
seemed not to be listening, so she went on again:  `Twenty-four
hours, I THINK; or is it twelve?  I--'

  `Oh, don't bother ME,' said the Duchess; `I never could abide
figures!'  And with that she began nursing her child again,
singing a sort of lullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a
violent shake at the end of every line:

        `Speak roughly to your little boy,
          And beat him when he sneezes:
        He only does it to annoy,
          Because he knows it teases.'

                    CHORUS.

    (In which the cook and the baby joined):--

                `Wow! wow! wow!'

  While the Duchess sang the second verse of the song, she kept
tossing the baby violently up and down, and the poor little thing
howled so, that Alice could hardly hear the words:--

        `I speak severely to my boy,
          I beat him when he sneezes;
        For he can thoroughly enjoy
          The pepper when he pleases!'

                    CHORUS.

                `Wow! wow! wow!'

  `Here! you may nurse it a bit, if you like!' the Duchess said
to Alice, flinging the baby at her as she spoke.  `I must go and
get ready to play croquet with the Queen,' and she hurried out of
the room.  The cook threw a frying-pan after her as she went out,
but it just missed her.

  Alice caught the baby with some difficulty, as it was a queer-
shaped little creature, and held out its arms and legs in all
directions, `just like a star-fish,' thought Alice.  The poor
little thing was snorting like a steam-engine when she caught it,
and kept doubling itself up and straightening itself out again,
so that altogether, for the first minute or two, it was as much
as she could do to hold it.

  As soon as she had made out the proper way of nursing it,
(which was to twist it up into a sort of knot, and then keep
tight hold of its right ear and left foot, so as to prevent its
undoing itself,) she carried it out into the open air.  `IF I
don't take this child away with me,' thought Alice, `they're sure
to kill it in a day or two:  wouldn't it be murder to leave it
behind?'  She said the last words out loud, and the little thing
grunted in reply (it had left off sneezing by this time).  `Don't
grunt,' said Alice; `that's not at all a proper way of expressing
yourself.'

  The baby grunted again, and Alice looked very anxiously into
its face to see what was the matter with it.  There could be no
doubt that it had a VERY turn-up nose, much more like a snout
than a real nose; also its eyes were getting extremely small for
a baby:  altogether Alice did not like the look of the thing at
all.  `But perhaps it was only sobbing,' she thought, and looked
into its eyes again, to see if there were any tears.

  No, there were no tears.  `If you're going to turn into a pig,
my dear,' said Alice, seriously, `I'll have nothing more to do
with you.  Mind now!'  The poor little thing sobbed again (or
grunted, it was impossible to say which), and they went on for
some while in silence.

  Alice was just beginning to think to herself, `Now, what am I
to do with this creature when I get it home?' when it grunted
again, so violently, that she looked down into its face in some
alarm.  This time there could be NO mistake about it:  it was
neither more nor less than a pig, and she felt that it would be
quite absurd for her to carry it further.

  So she set the little creature down, and felt quite relieved to
see it trot away quietly into the wood.  `If it had grown up,'
she said to herself, `it would have made a dreadfully ugly child:
but it makes rather a handsome pig, I think.'  And she began
thinking over other children she knew, who might do very well as
pigs, and was just saying to herself, `if one only knew the right
way to change them--' when she was a little startled by seeing
the Cheshire Cat sitting on a bough of a tree a few yards off.

  The Cat only grinned when it saw Alice.  It looked good-
natured, she thought:  still it had VERY long claws and a great
many teeth, so she felt that it ought to be treated with respect.

  `Cheshire Puss,' she began, rather timidly, as she did not at
all know whether it would like the name:  however, it only
grinned a little wider.  `Come, it's pleased so far,' thought
Alice, and she went on.  `Would you tell me, please, which way I
ought to go from here?'

  `That depends a good deal on where you want to get to,' said
the Cat.

  `I don't much care where--' said Alice.

  `Then it doesn't matter which way you go,' said the Cat.

  `--so long as I get SOMEWHERE,' Alice added as an explanation.

  `Oh, you're sure to do that,' said the Cat, `if you only walk
long enough.'

  Alice felt that this could not be denied, so she tried another
question.  `What sort of people live about here?'

  `In THAT direction,' the Cat said, waving its right paw round,
`lives a Hatter:  and in THAT direction,' waving the other paw,
`lives a March Hare.  Visit either you like:  they're both mad.'

  `But I don't want to go among mad people,' Alice remarked.

  `Oh, you can't help that,' said the Cat:  `we're all mad here.
I'm mad.  You're mad.'

  `How do you know I'm mad?' said Alice.

  `You must be,' said the Cat, `or you wouldn't have come here.'

  Alice didn't think that proved it at all; however, she went on
`And how do you know that you're mad?'

  `To begin with,' said the Cat, `a dog's not mad.  You grant
that?'

  `I suppose so,' said Alice.

  `Well, then,' the Cat went on, `you see, a dog growls when it's
angry, and wags its tail when it's pleased.  Now I growl when I'm
pleased, and wag my tail when I'm angry.  Therefore I'm mad.'

  `I call it purring, not growling,' said Alice.

  `Call it what you like,' said the Cat.  `Do you play croquet
with the Queen to-day?'

  `I should like it very much,' said Alice, `but I haven't been
invited yet.'

  `You'll see me there,' said the Cat, and vanished.

  Alice was not much surprised at this, she was getting so used
to queer things happening.  While she was looking at the place
where it had been, it suddenly appeared again.

  `By-the-bye, what became of the baby?' said the Cat.  `I'd
nearly forgotten to ask.'

  `It turned into a pig,' Alice quietly said, just as if it had
come back in a natural way.

  `I thought it would,' said the Cat, and vanished again.

  Alice waited a little, half expecting to see it again, but it
did not appear, and after a minute or two she walked on in the
direction in which the March Hare was said to live.  `I've seen
hatters before,' she said to herself; `the March Hare will be
much the most interesting, and perhaps as this is May it won't be
raving mad--at least not so mad as it was in March.'  As she said
this, she looked up, and there was the Cat again, sitting on a
branch of a tree.

  `Did you say pig, or fig?' said the Cat.

  `I said pig,' replied Alice; `and I wish you wouldn't keep
appearing and vanishing so suddenly:  you make one quite giddy.'

  `All right,' said the Cat; and this time it vanished quite slowly,
beginning with the end of the tail, and ending with the grin,
which remained some time after the rest of it had gone.

  `Well!  I've often seen a cat without a grin,' thought Alice;
`but a grin without a cat!  It's the most curious thing I ever
saw in my life!'

  She had not gone much farther before she came in sight of the
house of the March Hare:  she thought it must be the right house,
because the chimneys were shaped like ears and the roof was
thatched with fur.  It was so large a house, that she did not
like to go nearer till she had nibbled some more of the lefthand
bit of mushroom, and raised herself to about two feet high:  even
then she walked up towards it rather timidly, saying to herself
`Suppose it should be raving mad after all!  I almost wish I'd
gone to see the Hatter instead!'



= CHAPTER VII =
=( A Mad Tea-Party )=


  There was a table set out under a tree in front of the house,
and the March Hare and the Hatter were having tea at it:  a
Dormouse was sitting between them, fast asleep, and the other two
were using it as a cushion, resting their elbows on it, and talking
over its head.  `Very uncomfortable for the Dormouse,' thought Alice;
`only, as it's asleep, I suppose it doesn't mind.'

  The table was a large one, but the three were all crowded
together at one corner of it:  `No room!  No room!' they cried
out when they saw Alice coming.  `There's PLENTY of room!' said
Alice indignantly, and she sat down in a large arm-chair at one
end of the table.

  `Have some wine,' the March Hare said in an encouraging tone.

  Alice looked all round the table, but there was nothing on it
but tea.  `I don't see any wine,' she remarked.

  `There isn't any,' said the March Hare.

  `Then it wasn't very civil of you to offer it,' said Alice
angrily.

  `It wasn't very civil of you to sit down without being
invited,' said the March Hare.

  `I didn't know it was YOUR table,' said Alice; `it's laid for a
great many more than three.'

  `Your hair wants cutting,' said the Hatter.  He had been
looking at Alice for some time with great curiosity, and this was
his first speech.

  `You should learn not to make personal remarks,' Alice said
with some severity; `it's very rude.'

  The Hatter opened his eyes very wide on hearing this; but all
he SAID was, `Why is a raven like a writing-desk?'

  `Come, we shall have some fun now!' thought Alice.  `I'm glad
they've begun asking riddles.--I believe I can guess that,' she
added aloud.

  `Do you mean that you think you can find out the answer to it?'
said the March Hare.

  `Exactly so,' said Alice.

  `Then you should say what you mean,' the March Hare went on.

  `I do,' Alice hastily replied; `at least--at least I mean what
I say--that's the same thing, you know.'

  `Not the same thing a bit!' said the Hatter.  `You might just
as well say that "I see what I eat" is the same thing as "I eat
what I see"!'

  `You might just as well say,' added the March Hare, `that "I
like what I get" is the same thing as "I get what I like"!'

  `You might just as well say,' added the Dormouse, who seemed to
be talking in his sleep, `that "I breathe when I sleep" is the
same thing as "I sleep when I breathe"!'

  `It IS the same thing with you,' said the Hatter, and here the
conversation dropped, and the party sat silent for a minute,
while Alice thought over all she could remember about ravens and
writing-desks, which wasn't much.

  The Hatter was the first to break the silence.  `What day of
the month is it?' he said, turning to Alice:  he had taken his
watch out of his pocket, and was looking at it uneasily, shaking
it every now and then, and holding it to his ear.

  Alice considered a little, and then said `The fourth.'

  `Two days wrong!' sighed the Hatter.  `I told you butter
wouldn't suit the works!' he added looking angrily at the March
Hare.

  `It was the BEST butter,' the March Hare meekly replied.

  `Yes, but some crumbs must have got in as well,' the Hatter
grumbled:  `you shouldn't have put it in with the bread-knife.'

  The March Hare took the watch and looked at it gloomily:  then
he dipped it into his cup of tea, and looked at it again:  but he
could think of nothing better to say than his first remark, `It
was the BEST butter, you know.'

  Alice had been looking over his shoulder with some curiosity.
`What a funny watch!' she remarked.  `It tells the day of the
month, and doesn't tell what o'clock it is!'

  `Why should it?' muttered the Hatter.  `Does YOUR watch tell
you what year it is?'

  `Of course not,' Alice replied very readily:  `but that's
because it stays the same year for such a long time together.'

  `Which is just the case with MINE,' said the Hatter.

  Alice felt dreadfully puzzled.  The Hatter's remark seemed to
have no sort of meaning in it, and yet it was certainly English.
`I don't quite understand you,' she said, as politely as she
could.

  `The Dormouse is asleep again,' said the Hatter, and he poured
a little hot tea upon its nose.

  The Dormouse shook its head impatiently, and said, without
opening its eyes, `Of course, of course; just what I was going to
remark myself.'

  `Have you guessed the riddle yet?' the Hatter said, turning to
Alice again.

  `No, I give it up,' Alice replied:  `what's the answer?'

  `I haven't the slightest idea,' said the Hatter.

  `Nor I,' said the March Hare.

  Alice sighed wearily.  `I think you might do something better
with the time,' she said, `than waste it in asking riddles that
have no answers.'

  `If you knew Time as well as I do,' said the Hatter, `you
wouldn't talk about wasting IT.  It's HIM.'

  `I don't know what you mean,' said Alice.

  `Of course you don't!' the Hatter said, tossing his head
contemptuously.  `I dare say you never even spoke to Time!'

  `Perhaps not,' Alice cautiously replied:  `but I know I have to
beat time when I learn music.'

  `Ah! that accounts for it,' said the Hatter.  `He won't stand
beating.  Now, if you only kept on good terms with him, he'd do
almost anything you liked with the clock.  For instance, suppose
it were nine o'clock in the morning, just time to begin lessons:
you'd only have to whisper a hint to Time, and round goes the
clock in a twinkling!  Half-past one, time for dinner!'

  (`I only wish it was,' the March Hare said to itself in a
whisper.)

  `That would be grand, certainly,' said Alice thoughtfully:
`but then--I shouldn't be hungry for it, you know.'

  `Not at first, perhaps,' said the Hatter:  `but you could keep
it to half-past one as long as you liked.'

  `Is that the way YOU manage?' Alice asked.

  The Hatter shook his head mournfully.  `Not I!' he replied.
`We quarrelled last March--just before HE went mad, you know--'
(pointing with his tea spoon at the March Hare,) `--it was at the
great concert given by the Queen of Hearts, and I had to sing

            "Twinkle, twinkle, little bat!
            How I wonder what you're at!"

You know the song, perhaps?'

  `I've heard something like it,' said Alice.

  `It goes on, you know,' the Hatter continued, `in this way:--

            "Up above the world you fly,
            Like a tea-tray in the sky.
                    Twinkle, twinkle--"'

Here the Dormouse shook itself, and began singing in its sleep
`Twinkle, twinkle, twinkle, twinkle--' and went on so long that
they had to pinch it to make it stop.

  `Well, I'd hardly finished the first verse,' said the Hatter,
`when the Queen jumped up and bawled out, "He's murdering the
time!  Off with his head!"'

  `How dreadfully savage!' exclaimed Alice.

  `And ever since that,' the Hatter went on in a mournful tone,
`he won't do a thing I ask!  It's always six o'clock now.'

  A bright idea came into Alice's head.  `Is that the reason so
many tea-things are put out here?' she asked.

  `Yes, that's it,' said the Hatter with a sigh:  `it's always
tea-time, and we've no time to wash the things between whiles.'

  `Then you keep moving round, I suppose?' said Alice.

  `Exactly so,' said the Hatter:  `as the things get used up.'

  `But what happens when you come to the beginning again?' Alice
ventured to ask.

  `Suppose we change the subject,' the March Hare interrupted,
yawning.  `I'm getting tired of this.  I vote the young lady
tells us a story.'

  `I'm afraid I don't know one,' said Alice, rather alarmed at
the proposal.

  `Then the Dormouse shall!' they both cried.  `Wake up,
Dormouse!'  And they pinched it on both sides at once.

  The Dormouse slowly opened his eyes.  `I wasn't asleep,' he
said in a hoarse, feeble voice:  `I heard every word you fellows
were saying.'

  `Tell us a story!' said the March Hare.

  `Yes, please do!' pleaded Alice.

  `And be quick about it,' added the Hatter, `or you'll be asleep
again before it's done.'

  `Once upon a time there were three little sisters,' the
Dormouse began in a great hurry; `and their names were Elsie,
Lacie, and Tillie; and they lived at the bottom of a well--'

  `What did they live on?' said Alice, who always took a great
interest in questions of eating and drinking.

  `They lived on treacle,' said the Dormouse, after thinking a
minute or two.

  `They couldn't have done that, you know,' Alice gently
remarked; `they'd have been ill.'

  `So they were,' said the Dormouse; `VERY ill.'

  Alice tried to fancy to herself what such an extraordinary ways
of living would be like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went
on:  `But why did they live at the bottom of a well?'

  `Take some more tea,' the March Hare said to Alice, very
earnestly.

  `I've had nothing yet,' Alice replied in an offended tone, `so
I can't take more.'

  `You mean you can't take LESS,' said the Hatter:  `it's very
easy to take MORE than nothing.'

  `Nobody asked YOUR opinion,' said Alice.

  `Who's making personal remarks now?' the Hatter asked
triumphantly.

  Alice did not quite know what to say to this:  so she helped
herself to some tea and bread-and-butter, and then turned to the
Dormouse, and repeated her question.  `Why did they live at the
bottom of a well?'

  The Dormouse again took a minute or two to think about it, and
then said, `It was a treacle-well.'

  `There's no such thing!'  Alice was beginning very angrily, but
the Hatter and the March Hare went `Sh! sh!' and the Dormouse
sulkily remarked, `If you can't be civil, you'd better finish the
story for yourself.'

  `No, please go on!' Alice said very humbly; `I won't interrupt
again.  I dare say there may be ONE.'

  `One, indeed!' said the Dormouse indignantly.  However, he
consented to go on.  `And so these three little sisters--they
were learning to draw, you know--'

  `What did they draw?' said Alice, quite forgetting her promise.

  `Treacle,' said the Dormouse, without considering at all this
time.

  `I want a clean cup,' interrupted the Hatter:  `let's all move
one place on.'

  He moved on as he spoke, and the Dormouse followed him:  the
March Hare moved into the Dormouse's place, and Alice rather
unwillingly took the place of the March Hare.  The Hatter was the
only one who got any advantage from the change:  and Alice was a
good deal worse off than before, as the March Hare had just upset
the milk-jug into his plate.

  Alice did not wish to offend the Dormouse again, so she began
very cautiously:  `But I don't understand.  Where did they draw
the treacle from?'

  `You can draw water out of a water-well,' said the Hatter; `so
I should think you could draw treacle out of a treacle-well--eh,
stupid?'

  `But they were IN the well,' Alice said to the Dormouse, not
choosing to notice this last remark.

  `Of course they were', said the Dormouse; `--well in.'

  This answer so confused poor Alice, that she let the Dormouse
go on for some time without interrupting it.

  `They were learning to draw,' the Dormouse went on, yawning and
rubbing its eyes, for it was getting very sleepy; `and they drew
all manner of things--everything that begins with an M--'

  `Why with an M?' said Alice.

  `Why not?' said the March Hare.

  Alice was silent.

  The Dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was going
off into a doze; but, on being pinched by the Hatter, it woke up
again with a little shriek, and went on:  `--that begins with an
M, such as mouse-traps, and the moon, and memory, and muchness--
you know you say things are "much of a muchness"--did you ever
see such a thing as a drawing of a muchness?'

  `Really, now you ask me,' said Alice, very much confused, `I
don't think--'

  `Then you shouldn't talk,' said the Hatter.

  This piece of rudeness was more than Alice could bear:  she got
up in great disgust, and walked off; the Dormouse fell asleep
instantly, and neither of the others took the least notice of her
going, though she looked back once or twice, half hoping that
they would call after her:  the last time she saw them, they were
trying to put the Dormouse into the teapot.

  `At any rate I'll never go THERE again!' said Alice as she
picked her way through the wood.  `It's the stupidest tea-party I
ever was at in all my life!'

  Just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees had a
door leading right into it.  `That's very curious!' she thought.
`But everything's curious today.  I think I may as well go in at once.'
And in she went.

  Once more she found herself in the long hall, and close to the
little glass table.  `Now, I'll manage better this time,'
she said to herself, and began by taking the little golden key,
and unlocking the door that led into the garden.  Then she went
to work nibbling at the mushroom (she had kept a piece of it
in her pocket) till she was about a foot high:  then she walked down
the little passage:  and THEN--she found herself at last in the
beautiful garden, among the bright flower-beds and the cool fountains.



= CHAPTER VIII =
=( The Queen's Croquet-Ground )=


  A large rose-tree stood near the entrance of the garden:  the
roses growing on it were white, but there were three gardeners at
it, busily painting them red.  Alice thought this a very curious
thing, and she went nearer to watch them, and just as she came up
to them she heard one of them say, `Look out now, Five!  Don't go
splashing paint over me like that!'

  `I couldn't help it,' said Five, in a sulky tone; `Seven jogged
my elbow.'

  On which Seven looked up and said, `That's right, Five!  Always
lay the blame on others!'

  `YOU'D better not talk!' said Five.  `I heard the Queen say only
yesterday you deserved to be beheaded!'

  `What for?' said the one who had spoken first.

  `That's none of YOUR business, Two!' said Seven.

  `Yes, it IS his business!' said Five, `and I'll tell him--it
was for bringing the cook tulip-roots instead of onions.'

  Seven flung down his brush, and had just begun `Well, of all
the unjust things--' when his eye chanced to fall upon Alice, as
she stood watching them, and he checked himself suddenly:  the
others looked round also, and all of them bowed low.

  `Would you tell me,' said Alice, a little timidly, `why you are
painting those roses?'

  Five and Seven said nothing, but looked at Two.  Two began in a
low voice, `Why the fact is, you see, Miss, this here ought to
have been a RED rose-tree, and we put a white one in by mistake;
and if the Queen was to find it out, we should all have our heads
cut off, you know.  So you see, Miss, we're doing our best, afore
she comes, to--'  At this moment Five, who had been anxiously
looking across the garden, called out `The Queen!  The Queen!'
and the three gardeners instantly threw themselves flat upon
their faces.  There was a sound of many footsteps, and Alice
looked round, eager to see the Queen.

  First came ten soldiers carrying clubs; these were all shaped
like the three gardeners, oblong and flat, with their hands and
feet at the corners:  next the ten courtiers; these were
ornamented all over with diamonds, and walked two and two, as the
soldiers did.  After these came the royal children; there were
ten of them, and the little dears came jumping merrily along hand
in hand, in couples:  they were all ornamented with hearts.  Next
came the guests, mostly Kings and Queens, and among them Alice
recognised the White Rabbit:  it was talking in a hurried nervous
manner, smiling at everything that was said, and went by without
noticing her.  Then followed the Knave of Hearts, carrying the
King's crown on a crimson velvet cushion; and, last of all this
grand procession, came THE KING AND QUEEN OF HEARTS.

  Alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on
her face like the three gardeners, but she could not remember
ever having heard of such a rule at processions; `and besides,
what would be the use of a procession,' thought she, `if people
had all to lie down upon their faces, so that they couldn't see it?'
So she stood still where she was, and waited.

  When the procession came opposite to Alice, they all stopped
and looked at her, and the Queen said severely `Who is this?'
She said it to the Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in reply.

  `Idiot!' said the Queen, tossing her head impatiently; and,
turning to Alice, she went on, `What's your name, child?'

  `My name is Alice, so please your Majesty,' said Alice very
politely; but she added, to herself, `Why, they're only a pack of
cards, after all.  I needn't be afraid of them!'

  `And who are THESE?' said the Queen, pointing to the three
gardeners who were lying round the rosetree; for, you see, as
they were lying on their faces, and the pattern on their backs
was the same as the rest of the pack, she could not tell whether
they were gardeners, or soldiers, or courtiers, or three of her
own children.

  `How should I know?' said Alice, surprised at her own courage.
`It's no business of MINE.'

  The Queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her
for a moment like a wild beast, screamed `Off with her head!
Off--'

  `Nonsense!' said Alice, very loudly and decidedly, and the
Queen was silent.

  The King laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said
`Consider, my dear:  she is only a child!'

  The Queen turned angrily away from him, and said to the Knave
`Turn them over!'

  The Knave did so, very carefully, with one foot.

  `Get up!' said the Queen, in a shrill, loud voice, and the
three gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the
King, the Queen, the royal children, and everybody else.

  `Leave off that!' screamed the Queen.  `You make me giddy.'
And then, turning to the rose-tree, she went on, `What HAVE you
been doing here?'

  `May it please your Majesty,' said Two, in a very humble tone,
going down on one knee as he spoke, `we were trying--'

  `I see!' said the Queen, who had meanwhile been examining the
roses.  `Off with their heads!' and the procession moved on,
three of the soldiers remaining behind to execute the unfortunate
gardeners, who ran to Alice for protection.

  `You shan't be beheaded!' said Alice, and she put them into a
large flower-pot that stood near.  The three soldiers wandered
about for a minute or two, looking for them, and then quietly
marched off after the others.

  `Are their heads off?' shouted the Queen.

  `Their heads are gone, if it please your Majesty!' the soldiers
shouted in reply.

  `That's right!' shouted the Queen.  `Can you play croquet?'

  The soldiers were silent, and looked at Alice, as the question
was evidently meant for her.

  `Yes!' shouted Alice.

  `Come on, then!' roared the Queen, and Alice joined the
procession, wondering very much what would happen next.

  `It's--it's a very fine day!' said a timid voice at her side.
She was walking by the White Rabbit, who was peeping anxiously
into her face.

  `Very,' said Alice:  `--where's the Duchess?'

  `Hush!  Hush!' said the Rabbit in a low, hurried tone.  He
looked anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised
himself upon tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and
whispered `She's under sentence of execution.'

  `What for?' said Alice.

  `Did you say "What a pity!"?' the Rabbit asked.

  `No, I didn't,' said Alice:  `I don't think it's at all a pity.
I said "What for?"'

  `She boxed the Queen's ears--' the Rabbit began.  Alice gave a
little scream of laughter.  `Oh, hush!' the Rabbit whispered in a
frightened tone.  `The Queen will hear you!  You see, she came
rather late, and the Queen said--'

  `Get to your places!' shouted the Queen in a voice of thunder,
and people began running about in all directions, tumbling up
against each other; however, they got settled down in a minute or
two, and the game began.  Alice thought she had never seen such a
curious croquet-ground in her life; it was all ridges and
furrows; the balls were live hedgehogs, the mallets live
flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double themselves up and to
stand on their hands and feet, to make the arches.

  The chief difficulty Alice found at first was in managing her
flamingo:  she succeeded in getting its body tucked away,
comfortably enough, under her arm, with its legs hanging down,
but generally, just as she had got its neck nicely straightened
out, and was going to give the hedgehog a blow with its head, it
WOULD twist itself round and look up in her face, with such a
puzzled expression that she could not help bursting out laughing:
and when she had got its head down, and was going to begin again,
it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog had unrolled
itself, and was in the act of crawling away:  besides all this,
there was generally a ridge or furrow in the way wherever she
wanted to send the hedgehog to, and, as the doubled-up soldiers
were always getting up and walking off to other parts of the
ground, Alice soon came to the conclusion that it was a very
difficult game indeed.

  The players all played at once without waiting for turns,
quarrelling all the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs; and in
a very short time the Queen was in a furious passion, and went
stamping about, and shouting `Off with his head!' or `Off with
her head!' about once in a minute.

  Alice began to feel very uneasy:  to be sure, she had not as
yet had any dispute with the Queen, but she knew that it might
happen any minute, `and then,' thought she, `what would become of
me?  They're dreadfully fond of beheading people here; the great
wonder is, that there's any one left alive!'

  She was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering
whether she could get away without being seen, when she noticed a
curious appearance in the air:  it puzzled her very much at
first, but, after watching it a minute or two, she made it out to
be a grin, and she said to herself `It's the Cheshire Cat:  now I
shall have somebody to talk to.'

  `How are you getting on?' said the Cat, as soon as there was
mouth enough for it to speak with.

  Alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded.  `It's no
use speaking to it,' she thought, `till its ears have come, or at
least one of them.'  In another minute the whole head appeared,
and then Alice put down her flamingo, and began an account of the
game, feeling very glad she had someone to listen to her.  The
Cat seemed to think that there was enough of it now in sight, and
no more of it appeared.

  `I don't think they play at all fairly,' Alice began, in rather
a complaining tone, `and they all quarrel so dreadfully one can't
hear oneself speak--and they don't seem to have any rules in
particular; at least, if there are, nobody attends to them--and
you've no idea how confusing it is all the things being alive;
for instance, there's the arch I've got to go through next
walking about at the other end of the ground--and I should have
croqueted the Queen's hedgehog just now, only it ran away when it
saw mine coming!'

  `How do you like the Queen?' said the Cat in a low voice.

  `Not at all,' said Alice:  `she's so extremely--'  Just then
she noticed that the Queen was close behind her, listening:  so
she went on, `--likely to win, that it's hardly worth while
finishing the game.'

  The Queen smiled and passed on.

  `Who ARE you talking to?' said the King, going up to Alice, and
looking at the Cat's head with great curiosity.

  `It's a friend of mine--a Cheshire Cat,' said Alice:  `allow me
to introduce it.'

  `I don't like the look of it at all,' said the King:
`however, it may kiss my hand if it likes.'

  `I'd rather not,' the Cat remarked.

  `Don't be impertinent,' said the King, `and don't look at me
like that!'  He got behind Alice as he spoke.

  `A cat may look at a king,' said Alice.  `I've read that in
some book, but I don't remember where.'

  `Well, it must be removed,' said the King very decidedly, and
he called the Queen, who was passing at the moment, `My dear!  I
wish you would have this cat removed!'

  The Queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great
or small.  `Off with his head!' she said, without even looking
round.

  `I'll fetch the executioner myself,' said the King eagerly, and
he hurried off.

  Alice thought she might as well go back, and see how the game
was going on, as she heard the Queen's voice in the distance,
screaming with passion.  She had already heard her sentence three
of the players to be executed for having missed their turns, and
she did not like the look of things at all, as the game was in
such confusion that she never knew whether it was her turn or
not.  So she went in search of her hedgehog.

  The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog,
which seemed to Alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one
of them with the other:  the only difficulty was, that her
flamingo was gone across to the other side of the garden, where
Alice could see it trying in a helpless sort of way to fly up
into a tree.

  By the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back,
the fight was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight:
`but it doesn't matter much,' thought Alice, `as all the arches
are gone from this side of the ground.'  So she tucked it away
under her arm, that it might not escape again, and went back for
a little more conversation with her friend.

  When she got back to the Cheshire Cat, she was surprised to
find quite a large crowd collected round it:  there was a dispute
going on between the executioner, the King, and the Queen, who
were all talking at once, while all the rest were quite silent,
and looked very uncomfortable.

  The moment Alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to
settle the question, and they repeated their arguments to her,
though, as they all spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed
to make out exactly what they said.

  The executioner's argument was, that you couldn't cut off a
head unless there was a body to cut it off from:  that he had
never had to do such a thing before, and he wasn't going to begin
at HIS time of life.

  The King's argument was, that anything that had a head could be
beheaded, and that you weren't to talk nonsense.

  The Queen's argument was, that if something wasn't done about
it in less than no time she'd have everybody executed, all round.
(It was this last remark that had made the whole party look so
grave and anxious.)

  Alice could think of nothing else to say but `It belongs to the
Duchess:  you'd better ask HER about it.'

  `She's in prison,' the Queen said to the executioner:  `fetch
her here.'  And the executioner went off like an arrow.

   The Cat's head began fading away the moment he was gone, and,
by the time he had come back with the Duchess, it had entirely
disappeared; so the King and the executioner ran wildly up and down
looking for it, while the rest of the party went back to the game.



= CHAPTER IX =
=( The Mock Turtle's Story )=


  `You can't think how glad I am to see you again, you dear old
thing!' said the Duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately
into Alice's, and they walked off together.

  Alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and
thought to herself that perhaps it was only the pepper that had
made her so savage when they met in the kitchen.

  `When I'M a Duchess,' she said to herself, (not in a very
hopeful tone though), `I won't have any pepper in my kitchen AT
ALL.  Soup does very well without--Maybe it's always pepper that
makes people hot-tempered,' she went on, very much pleased at
having found out a new kind of rule, `and vinegar that makes them
sour--and camomile that makes them bitter--and--and barley-sugar
and such things that make children sweet-tempered.  I only wish
people knew that:  then they wouldn't be so stingy about it, you
know--'

  She had quite forgotten the Duchess by this time, and was a
little startled when she heard her voice close to her ear.
`You're thinking about something, my dear, and that makes you
forget to talk.  I can't tell you just now what the moral of that
is, but I shall remember it in a bit.'

  `Perhaps it hasn't one,' Alice ventured to remark.

  `Tut, tut, child!' said the Duchess.  `Everything's got a
moral, if only you can find it.'  And she squeezed herself up
closer to Alice's side as she spoke.

  Alice did not much like keeping so close to her:  first,
because the Duchess was VERY ugly; and secondly, because she was
exactly the right height to rest her chin upon Alice's shoulder,
and it was an uncomfortably sharp chin.  However, she did not
like to be rude, so she bore it as well as she could.

  `The game's going on rather better now,' she said, by way of
keeping up the conversation a little.

  `'Tis so,' said the Duchess:  `and the moral of that is--"Oh,
'tis love, 'tis love, that makes the world go round!"'

  `Somebody said,' Alice whispered, `that it's done by everybody
minding their own business!'

  `Ah, well!  It means much the same thing,' said the Duchess,
digging her sharp little chin into Alice's shoulder as she added,
`and the moral of THAT is--"Take care of the sense, and the
sounds will take care of themselves."'

  `How fond she is of finding morals in things!' Alice thought to
herself.

  `I dare say you're wondering why I don't put my arm round your
waist,' the Duchess said after a pause:  `the reason is, that I'm
doubtful about the temper of your flamingo.  Shall I try the
experiment?'

  `HE might bite,' Alice cautiously replied, not feeling at all
anxious to have the experiment tried.

  `Very true,' said the Duchess:  `flamingoes and mustard both
bite.  And the moral of that is--"Birds of a feather flock
together."'

  `Only mustard isn't a bird,' Alice remarked.

  `Right, as usual,' said the Duchess:  `what a clear way you
have of putting things!'

  `It's a mineral, I THINK,' said Alice.

  `Of course it is,' said the Duchess, who seemed ready to agree
to everything that Alice said; `there's a large mustard-mine near
here.  And the moral of that is--"The more there is of mine, the
less there is of yours."'

  `Oh, I know!' exclaimed Alice, who had not attended to this
last remark, `it's a vegetable.  It doesn't look like one, but it
is.'

  `I quite agree with you,' said the Duchess; `and the moral of
that is--"Be what you would seem to be"--or if you'd like it put
more simply--"Never imagine yourself not to be otherwise than
what it might appear to others that what you were or might have
been was not otherwise than what you had been would have appeared
to them to be otherwise."'

  `I think I should understand that better,' Alice said very
politely, `if I had it written down:  but I can't quite follow it
as you say it.'

  `That's nothing to what I could say if I chose,' the Duchess
replied, in a pleased tone.

  `Pray don't trouble yourself to say it any longer than that,'
said Alice.

  `Oh, don't talk about trouble!' said the Duchess.  `I make you
a present of everything I've said as yet.'

  `A cheap sort of present!' thought Alice.  `I'm glad they don't
give birthday presents like that!'  But she did not venture to
say it out loud.

  `Thinking again?' the Duchess asked, with another dig of her
sharp little chin.

  `I've a right to think,' said Alice sharply, for she was
beginning to feel a little worried.

  `Just about as much right,' said the Duchess, `as pigs have to fly;
and the m--'

  But here, to Alice's great surprise, the Duchess's voice died
away, even in the middle of her favourite word `moral,' and the
arm that was linked into hers began to tremble.  Alice looked up,
and there stood the Queen in front of them, with her arms folded,
frowning like a thunderstorm.

  `A fine day, your Majesty!' the Duchess began in a low, weak
voice.

  `Now, I give you fair warning,' shouted the Queen, stamping on
the ground as she spoke; `either you or your head must be off,
and that in about half no time!  Take your choice!'

  The Duchess took her choice, and was gone in a moment.

  `Let's go on with the game,' the Queen said to Alice; and Alice
was too much frightened to say a word, but slowly followed her
back to the croquet-ground.

  The other guests had taken advantage of the Queen's absence,
and were resting in the shade:  however, the moment they saw her,
they hurried back to the game, the Queen merely remarking that a
moment's delay would cost them their lives.

  All the time they were playing the Queen never left off
quarrelling with the other players, and shouting `Off with his
head!' or `Off with her head!'  Those whom she sentenced were
taken into custody by the soldiers, who of course had to leave
off being arches to do this, so that by the end of half an hour
or so there were no arches left, and all the players, except the
King, the Queen, and Alice, were in custody and under sentence of
execution.

  Then the Queen left off, quite out of breath, and said to
Alice, `Have you seen the Mock Turtle yet?'

  `No,' said Alice.  `I don't even know what a Mock Turtle is.'

  `It's the thing Mock Turtle Soup is made from,' said the Queen.

  `I never saw one, or heard of one,' said Alice.

  `Come on, then,' said the Queen, `and he shall tell you his
history,'

  As they walked off together, Alice heard the King say in a low
voice, to the company generally, `You are all pardoned.'  `Come,
THAT'S a good thing!' she said to herself, for she had felt quite
unhappy at the number of executions the Queen had ordered.

  They very soon came upon a Gryphon, lying fast asleep in the
sun.  (IF you don't know what a Gryphon is, look at the picture.)
`Up, lazy thing!' said the Queen, `and take this young lady to
see the Mock Turtle, and to hear his history.  I must go back and
see after some executions I have ordered'; and she walked off,
leaving Alice alone with the Gryphon.  Alice did not quite like
the look of the creature, but on the whole she thought it would
be quite as safe to stay with it as to go after that savage
Queen:  so she waited.

  The Gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes:  then it watched the
Queen till she was out of sight:  then it chuckled.  `What fun!'
said the Gryphon, half to itself, half to Alice.

  `What IS the fun?' said Alice.

  `Why, SHE,' said the Gryphon.  `It's all her fancy, that:  they
never executes nobody, you know.  Come on!'

  `Everybody says "come on!" here,' thought Alice, as she went
slowly after it:  `I never was so ordered about in all my life,
never!'

  They had not gone far before they saw the Mock Turtle in the
distance, sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and,
as they came nearer, Alice could hear him sighing as if his heart
would break.  She pitied him deeply.  `What is his sorrow?' she
asked the Gryphon, and the Gryphon answered, very nearly in the
same words as before, `It's all his fancy, that:  he hasn't got
no sorrow, you know.  Come on!'

  So they went up to the Mock Turtle, who looked at them with
large eyes full of tears, but said nothing.

  `This here young lady,' said the Gryphon, `she wants for to
know your history, she do.'

  `I'll tell it her,' said the Mock Turtle in a deep, hollow
tone:  `sit down, both of you, and don't speak a word till I've
finished.'

  So they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes.  Alice
thought to herself, `I don't see how he can EVEN finish, if he
doesn't begin.'  But she waited patiently.

  `Once,' said the Mock Turtle at last, with a deep sigh, `I was
a real Turtle.'

  These words were followed by a very long silence, broken only
by an occasional exclamation of `Hjckrrh!' from the Gryphon, and
the constant heavy sobbing of the Mock Turtle.  Alice was very
nearly getting up and saying, `Thank you, sir, for your
interesting story,' but she could not help thinking there MUST be
more to come, so she sat still and said nothing.

  `When we were little,' the Mock Turtle went on at last, more
calmly, though still sobbing a little now and then, `we went to
school in the sea.  The master was an old Turtle--we used to call
him Tortoise--'

  `Why did you call him Tortoise, if he wasn't one?' Alice asked.

  `We called him Tortoise because he taught us,' said the Mock
Turtle angrily:  `really you are very dull!'

  `You ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple
question,' added the Gryphon; and then they both sat silent and
looked at poor Alice, who felt ready to sink into the earth.  At
last the Gryphon said to the Mock Turtle, `Drive on, old fellow!
Don't be all day about it!' and he went on in these words:

  `Yes, we went to school in the sea, though you mayn't believe
it--'

  `I never said I didn't!' interrupted Alice.

  `You did,' said the Mock Turtle.

  `Hold your tongue!' added the Gryphon, before Alice could speak
again.  The Mock Turtle went on.

  `We had the best of educations--in fact, we went to school
every day--'

  `I'VE been to a day-school, too,' said Alice; `you needn't be
so proud as all that.'

  `With extras?' asked the Mock Turtle a little anxiously.

  `Yes,' said Alice, `we learned French and music.'

  `And washing?' said the Mock Turtle.

  `Certainly not!' said Alice indignantly.

  `Ah! then yours wasn't a really good school,' said the Mock
Turtle in a tone of great relief.  `Now at OURS they had at the
end of the bill, "French, music, AND WASHING--extra."'

  `You couldn't have wanted it much,' said Alice; `living at the
bottom of the sea.'

  `I couldn't afford to learn it.' said the Mock Turtle with a
sigh.  `I only took the regular course.'

  `What was that?' inquired Alice.

  `Reeling and Writhing, of course, to begin with,' the Mock
Turtle replied; `and then the different branches of Arithmetic--
Ambition, Distraction, Uglification, and Derision.'

  `I never heard of "Uglification,"' Alice ventured to say.  `What is it?'

  The Gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise.  `What!  Never
heard of uglifying!' it exclaimed.  `You know what to beautify is,
I suppose?'

  `Yes,' said Alice doubtfully:  `it means--to--make--anything--prettier.'

  `Well, then,' the Gryphon went on, `if you don't know what to
uglify is, you ARE a simpleton.'

  Alice did not feel encouraged to ask any more questions about
it, so she turned to the Mock Turtle, and said `What else had you
to learn?'

  `Well, there was Mystery,' the Mock Turtle replied, counting
off the subjects on his flappers, `--Mystery, ancient and modern,
with Seaography:  then Drawling--the Drawling-master was an old
conger-eel, that used to come once a week:  HE taught us
Drawling, Stretching, and Fainting in Coils.'

  `What was THAT like?' said Alice.

  `Well, I can't show it you myself,' the Mock Turtle said:  `I'm
too stiff.  And the Gryphon never learnt it.'

  `Hadn't time,' said the Gryphon:  `I went to the Classics
master, though.  He was an old crab, HE was.'

  `I never went to him,' the Mock Turtle said with a sigh:  `he
taught Laughing and Grief, they used to say.'

  `So he did, so he did,' said the Gryphon, sighing in his turn;
and both creatures hid their faces in their paws.

  `And how many hours a day did you do lessons?' said Alice, in a
hurry to change the subject.

  `Ten hours the first day,' said the Mock Turtle: `nine the
next, and so on.'

  `What a curious plan!' exclaimed Alice.

  `That's the reason they're called lessons,' the Gryphon
remarked:  `because they lessen from day to day.'

  This was quite a new idea to Alice, and she thought it over a
little before she made her next remark.  `Then the eleventh day
must have been a holiday?'

  `Of course it was,' said the Mock Turtle.

  `And how did you manage on the twelfth?' Alice went on eagerly.

  `That's enough about lessons,' the Gryphon interrupted in a
very decided tone:  `tell her something about the games now.'



= CHAPTER X =
=( The Lobster Quadrille )=


  The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of one flapper
across his eyes.  He looked at Alice, and tried to speak, but for
a minute or two sobs choked his voice.  `Same as if he had a bone
in his throat,' said the Gryphon:  and it set to work shaking him
and punching him in the back.  At last the Mock Turtle recovered
his voice, and, with tears running down his cheeks, he went on
again:--

  `You may not have lived much under the sea--' (`I haven't,' said Alice)--
`and perhaps you were never even introduced to a lobster--'
(Alice began to say `I once tasted--' but checked herself hastily,
and said `No, never') `--so you can have no idea what a delightful
thing a Lobster Quadrille is!'

  `No, indeed,' said Alice.  `What sort of a dance is it?'

  `Why,' said the Gryphon, `you first form into a line along the sea-shore--'

  `Two lines!' cried the Mock Turtle.  `Seals, turtles, salmon, and so on;
then, when you've cleared all the jelly-fish out of the way--'

  `THAT generally takes some time,' interrupted the Gryphon.

  `--you advance twice--'

  `Each with a lobster as a partner!' cried the Gryphon.

  `Of course,' the Mock Turtle said:  `advance twice, set to
partners--'

  `--change lobsters, and retire in same order,' continued the
Gryphon.

  `Then, you know,' the Mock Turtle went on, `you throw the--'

  `The lobsters!' shouted the Gryphon, with a bound into the air.

  `--as far out to sea as you can--'

  `Swim after them!' screamed the Gryphon.

  `Turn a somersault in the sea!' cried the Mock Turtle,
capering wildly about.

  `Change lobsters again!' yelled the Gryphon at the top of its voice.

  `Back to land again, and that's all the first figure,' said the
Mock Turtle, suddenly dropping his voice; and the two creatures,
who had been jumping about like mad things all this time, sat
down again very sadly and quietly, and looked at Alice.

  `It must be a very pretty dance,' said Alice timidly.

  `Would you like to see a little of it?' said the Mock Turtle.

  `Very much indeed,' said Alice.

  `Come, let's try the first figure!' said the Mock Turtle to the
Gryphon.  `We can do without lobsters, you know.  Which shall
sing?'

  `Oh, YOU sing,' said the Gryphon.  `I've forgotten the words.'

  So they began solemnly dancing round and round Alice, every now
and then treading on her toes when they passed too close, and
waving their forepaws to mark the time, while the Mock Turtle
sang this, very slowly and sadly:--


`"Will you walk a little faster?" said a whiting to a snail.
"There's a porpoise close behind us, and he's treading on my
 tail.
See how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance!
They are waiting on the shingle--will you come and join the
dance?

Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, will you join the
dance?
Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you join the
dance?


"You can really have no notion how delightful it will be
When they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to
                                                      sea!"
But the snail replied "Too far, too far!" and gave a look
                                                       askance--
Said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the
   dance.
    Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join
        the dance.
    Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join
        the dance.

`"What matters it how far we go?" his scaly friend replied.
"There is another shore, you know, upon the other side.
The further off from England the nearer is to France--
Then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join the dance.

    Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, will you join the
         dance?
    Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you join the
         dance?"'



  `Thank you, it's a very interesting dance to watch,' said
Alice, feeling very glad that it was over at last:  `and I do so
like that curious song about the whiting!'

  `Oh, as to the whiting,' said the Mock Turtle, `they--you've
seen them, of course?'

  `Yes,' said Alice, `I've often seen them at dinn--' she
checked herself hastily.

  `I don't know where Dinn may be,' said the Mock Turtle, `but
if you've seen them so often, of course you know what they're
like.'

  `I believe so,' Alice replied thoughtfully.  `They have their
tails in their mouths--and they're all over crumbs.'

  `You're wrong about the crumbs,' said the Mock Turtle:
`crumbs would all wash off in the sea.  But they HAVE their tails
in their mouths; and the reason is--' here the Mock Turtle
yawned and shut his eyes.--`Tell her about the reason and all
that,' he said to the Gryphon.

  `The reason is,' said the Gryphon, `that they WOULD go with
the lobsters to the dance.  So they got thrown out to sea.  So
they had to fall a long way.  So they got their tails fast in
their mouths.  So they couldn't get them out again.  That's all.'

  `Thank you,' said Alice, `it's very interesting.  I never knew
so much about a whiting before.'

  `I can tell you more than that, if you like,' said the
Gryphon.  `Do you know why it's called a whiting?'

  `I never thought about it,' said Alice.  `Why?'

  `IT DOES THE BOOTS AND SHOES.' the Gryphon replied very
solemnly.

  Alice was thoroughly puzzled.  `Does the boots and shoes!' she
repeated in a wondering tone.

  `Why, what are YOUR shoes done with?' said the Gryphon.  `I
mean, what makes them so shiny?'

  Alice looked down at them, and considered a little before she
gave her answer.  `They're done with blacking, I believe.'

  `Boots and shoes under the sea,' the Gryphon went on in a deep
voice, `are done with a whiting.  Now you know.'

  `And what are they made of?' Alice asked in a tone of great
curiosity.

  `Soles and eels, of course,' the Gryphon replied rather
impatiently:  `any shrimp could have told you that.'

  `If I'd been the whiting,' said Alice, whose thoughts were
still running on the song, `I'd have said to the porpoise, "Keep
back, please:  we don't want YOU with us!"'

  `They were obliged to have him with them,' the Mock Turtle
said:  `no wise fish would go anywhere without a porpoise.'

  `Wouldn't it really?' said Alice in a tone of great surprise.

  `Of course not,' said the Mock Turtle:  `why, if a fish came
to ME, and told me he was going a journey, I should say "With
what porpoise?"'

  `Don't you mean "purpose"?' said Alice.

  `I mean what I say,' the Mock Turtle replied in an offended
tone.  And the Gryphon added `Come, let's hear some of YOUR
adventures.'

  `I could tell you my adventures--beginning from this morning,'
said Alice a little timidly:  `but it's no use going back to
yesterday, because I was a different person then.'

  `Explain all that,' said the Mock Turtle.

  `No, no!  The adventures first,' said the Gryphon in an
impatient tone:  `explanations take such a dreadful time.'

  So Alice began telling them her adventures from the time when
she first saw the White Rabbit.  She was a little nervous about
it just at first, the two creatures got so close to her, one on
each side, and opened their eyes and mouths so VERY wide, but she
gained courage as she went on.  Her listeners were perfectly
quiet till she got to the part about her repeating `YOU ARE OLD,
FATHER WILLIAM,' to the Caterpillar, and the words all coming
different, and then the Mock Turtle drew a long breath, and said
`That's very curious.'

  `It's all about as curious as it can be,' said the Gryphon.

  `It all came different!' the Mock Turtle repeated
thoughtfully.  `I should like to hear her try and repeat
something now.  Tell her to begin.'  He looked at the Gryphon as
if he thought it had some kind of authority over Alice.

  `Stand up and repeat "'TIS THE VOICE OF THE SLUGGARD,"' said
the Gryphon.

  `How the creatures order one about, and make one repeat
lessons!' thought Alice; `I might as well be at school at once.'
However, she got up, and began to repeat it, but her head was so
full of the Lobster Quadrille, that she hardly knew what she was
saying, and the words came very queer indeed:--

    `'Tis the voice of the Lobster; I heard him declare,
    "You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my hair."
    As a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose
    Trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes.'

              [later editions continued as follows
    When the sands are all dry, he is gay as a lark,
    And will talk in contemptuous tones of the Shark,
    But, when the tide rises and sharks are around,
    His voice has a timid and tremulous sound.]

  `That's different from what I used to say when I was a child,'
said the Gryphon.

  `Well, I never heard it before,' said the Mock Turtle; `but it
sounds uncommon nonsense.'

  Alice said nothing; she had sat down with her face in her
hands, wondering if anything would EVER happen in a natural way
again.

  `I should like to have it explained,' said the Mock Turtle.

  `She can't explain it,' said the Gryphon hastily.  `Go on with
the next verse.'

  `But about his toes?' the Mock Turtle persisted.  `How COULD
he turn them out with his nose, you know?'

  `It's the first position in dancing.' Alice said; but was
dreadfully puzzled by the whole thing, and longed to change the
subject.

  `Go on with the next verse,' the Gryphon repeated impatiently:
`it begins "I passed by his garden."'

  Alice did not dare to disobey, though she felt sure it would
all come wrong, and she went on in a trembling voice:--

    `I passed by his garden, and marked, with one eye,
    How the Owl and the Panther were sharing a pie--'

        [later editions continued as follows
    The Panther took pie-crust, and gravy, and meat,
    While the Owl had the dish as its share of the treat.
    When the pie was all finished, the Owl, as a boon,
    Was kindly permitted to pocket the spoon:
    While the Panther received knife and fork with a growl,
    And concluded the banquet--]

  `What IS the use of repeating all that stuff,' the Mock Turtle
interrupted, `if you don't explain it as you go on?  It's by far
the most confusing thing I ever heard!'

  `Yes, I think you'd better leave off,' said the Gryphon:  and
Alice was only too glad to do so.

  `Shall we try another figure of the Lobster Quadrille?' the
Gryphon went on.  `Or would you like the Mock Turtle to sing you
a song?'

  `Oh, a song, please, if the Mock Turtle would be so kind,'
Alice replied, so eagerly that the Gryphon said, in a rather
offended tone, `Hm!  No accounting for tastes!  Sing her
"Turtle Soup," will you, old fellow?'

  The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and began, in a voice sometimes
choked with sobs, to sing this:--


    `Beautiful Soup, so rich and green,
    Waiting in a hot tureen!
    Who for such dainties would not stoop?
    Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
    Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
        Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
        Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
    Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,
        Beautiful, beautiful Soup!

    `Beautiful Soup!  Who cares for fish,
    Game, or any other dish?
    Who would not give all else for two
    Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
    Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
        Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
        Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
    Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,
        Beautiful, beauti--FUL SOUP!'

  `Chorus again!' cried the Gryphon, and the Mock Turtle had
just begun to repeat it, when a cry of `The trial's beginning!'
was heard in the distance.

  `Come on!' cried the Gryphon, and, taking Alice by the hand,
it hurried off, without waiting for the end of the song.

  `What trial is it?' Alice panted as she ran; but the Gryphon
only answered `Come on!' and ran the faster, while more and more
faintly came, carried on the breeze that followed them, the
melancholy words:--

    `Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,
        Beautiful, beautiful Soup!'



= CHAPTER XI =
=( Who Stole the Tarts? )=


  The King and Queen of Hearts were seated on their throne when
they arrived, with a great crowd assembled about them--all sorts
of little birds and beasts, as well as the whole pack of cards:
the Knave was standing before them, in chains, with a soldier on
each side to guard him; and near the King was the White Rabbit,
with a trumpet in one hand, and a scroll of parchment in the
other.  In the very middle of the court was a table, with a large
dish of tarts upon it:  they looked so good, that it made Alice
quite hungry to look at them--`I wish they'd get the trial done,'
she thought, `and hand round the refreshments!'  But there seemed
to be no chance of this, so she began looking at everything about
her, to pass away the time.

  Alice had never been in a court of justice before, but she had
read about them in books, and she was quite pleased to find that
she knew the name of nearly everything there.  `That's the
judge,' she said to herself, `because of his great wig.'

  The judge, by the way, was the King; and as he wore his crown
over the wig, (look at the frontispiece if you want to see how he
did it,) he did not look at all comfortable, and it was certainly
not becoming.

  `And that's the jury-box,' thought Alice, `and those twelve
creatures,' (she was obliged to say `creatures,' you see, because
some of them were animals, and some were birds,) `I suppose they
are the jurors.'  She said this last word two or three times over
to herself, being rather proud of it:  for she thought, and
rightly too, that very few little girls of her age knew the
meaning of it at all.  However, `jury-men' would have done just
as well.

  The twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates.
`What are they doing?'  Alice whispered to the Gryphon.  `They
can't have anything to put down yet, before the trial's begun.'

  `They're putting down their names,' the Gryphon whispered in
reply, `for fear they should forget them before the end of the
trial.'

  `Stupid things!' Alice began in a loud, indignant voice, but
she stopped hastily, for the White Rabbit cried out, `Silence in
the court!' and the King put on his spectacles and looked
anxiously round, to make out who was talking.

  Alice could see, as well as if she were looking over their
shoulders, that all the jurors were writing down `stupid things!'
on their slates, and she could even make out that one of them
didn't know how to spell `stupid,' and that he had to ask his
neighbour to tell him.  `A nice muddle their slates'll be in
before the trial's over!' thought Alice.

  One of the jurors had a pencil that squeaked.  This of course,
Alice could not stand, and she went round the court and got
behind him, and very soon found an opportunity of taking it
away.  She did it so quickly that the poor little juror (it was
Bill, the Lizard) could not make out at all what had become of
it; so, after hunting all about for it, he was obliged to write
with one finger for the rest of the day; and this was of very
little use, as it left no mark on the slate.

  `Herald, read the accusation!' said the King.

  On this the White Rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and
then unrolled the parchment scroll, and read as follows:--

    `The Queen of Hearts, she made some tarts,
          All on a summer day:
      The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts,
          And took them quite away!'

  `Consider your verdict,' the King said to the jury.

  `Not yet, not yet!' the Rabbit hastily interrupted.  `There's
a great deal to come before that!'

  `Call the first witness,' said the King; and the White Rabbit
blew three blasts on the trumpet, and called out, `First
witness!'

  The first witness was the Hatter.  He came in with a teacup in
one hand and a piece of bread-and-butter in the other.  `I beg
pardon, your Majesty,' he began, `for bringing these in:  but I
hadn't quite finished my tea when I was sent for.'

  `You ought to have finished,' said the King.  `When did you
begin?'

  The Hatter looked at the March Hare, who had followed him into
the court, arm-in-arm with the Dormouse.  `Fourteenth of March, I
think it was,' he said.

  `Fifteenth,' said the March Hare.

  `Sixteenth,' added the Dormouse.

  `Write that down,' the King said to the jury, and the jury
eagerly wrote down all three dates on their slates, and then
added them up, and reduced the answer to shillings and pence.

  `Take off your hat,' the King said to the Hatter.

  `It isn't mine,' said the Hatter.

  `Stolen!' the King exclaimed, turning to the jury, who
instantly made a memorandum of the fact.

  `I keep them to sell,' the Hatter added as an explanation;
`I've none of my own.  I'm a hatter.'

  Here the Queen put on her spectacles, and began staring at the
Hatter, who turned pale and fidgeted.

  `Give your evidence,' said the King; `and don't be nervous, or
I'll have you executed on the spot.'

  This did not seem to encourage the witness at all:  he kept
shifting from one foot to the other, looking uneasily at the
Queen, and in his confusion he bit a large piece out of his
teacup instead of the bread-and-butter.

  Just at this moment Alice felt a very curious sensation, which
puzzled her a good deal until she made out what it was:  she was
beginning to grow larger again, and she thought at first she
would get up and leave the court; but on second thoughts she
decided to remain where she was as long as there was room for
her.

  `I wish you wouldn't squeeze so.' said the Dormouse, who was
sitting next to her.  `I can hardly breathe.'

  `I can't help it,' said Alice very meekly:  `I'm growing.'

  `You've no right to grow here,' said the Dormouse.

  `Don't talk nonsense,' said Alice more boldly:  `you know
you're growing too.'

  `Yes, but I grow at a reasonable pace,' said the Dormouse:
`not in that ridiculous fashion.'  And he got up very sulkily
and crossed over to the other side of the court.

  All this time the Queen had never left off staring at the
Hatter, and, just as the Dormouse crossed the court, she said to
one of the officers of the court, `Bring me the list of the
singers in the last concert!' on which the wretched Hatter
trembled so, that he shook both his shoes off.

  `Give your evidence,' the King repeated angrily, `or I'll have
you executed, whether you're nervous or not.'

  `I'm a poor man, your Majesty,' the Hatter began, in a
trembling voice, `--and I hadn't begun my tea--not above a week
or so--and what with the bread-and-butter getting so thin--and
the twinkling of the tea--'

  `The twinkling of the what?' said the King.

  `It began with the tea,' the Hatter replied.

  `Of course twinkling begins with a T!' said the King sharply.
`Do you take me for a dunce?  Go on!'

  `I'm a poor man,' the Hatter went on, `and most things
twinkled after that--only the March Hare said--'

  `I didn't!' the March Hare interrupted in a great hurry.

  `You did!' said the Hatter.

  `I deny it!' said the March Hare.

  `He denies it,' said the King:  `leave out that part.'

  `Well, at any rate, the Dormouse said--' the Hatter went on,
looking anxiously round to see if he would deny it too:  but the
Dormouse denied nothing, being fast asleep.

  `After that,' continued the Hatter, `I cut some more bread-
and-butter--'

  `But what did the Dormouse say?' one of the jury asked.

  `That I can't remember,' said the Hatter.

  `You MUST remember,' remarked the King, `or I'll have you
executed.'

  The miserable Hatter dropped his teacup and bread-and-butter,
and went down on one knee.  `I'm a poor man, your Majesty,' he
began.

  `You're a very poor speaker,' said the King.

  Here one of the guinea-pigs cheered, and was immediately
suppressed by the officers of the court.  (As that is rather a
hard word, I will just explain to you how it was done.  They had
a large canvas bag, which tied up at the mouth with strings:
into this they slipped the guinea-pig, head first, and then sat
upon it.)

  `I'm glad I've seen that done,' thought Alice.  `I've so often
read in the newspapers, at the end of trials, "There was some
attempts at applause, which was immediately suppressed by the
officers of the court," and I never understood what it meant
till now.'

  `If that's all you know about it, you may stand down,'
continued the King.

  `I can't go no lower,' said the Hatter:  `I'm on the floor, as
it is.'

  `Then you may SIT down,' the King replied.

  Here the other guinea-pig cheered, and was suppressed.

  `Come, that finished the guinea-pigs!' thought Alice.  `Now we
shall get on better.'

  `I'd rather finish my tea,' said the Hatter, with an anxious
look at the Queen, who was reading the list of singers.

  `You may go,' said the King, and the Hatter hurriedly left the
court, without even waiting to put his shoes on.

  `--and just take his head off outside,' the Queen added to one
of the officers:  but the Hatter was out of sight before the
officer could get to the door.

  `Call the next witness!' said the King.

  The next witness was the Duchess's cook.  She carried the
pepper-box in her hand, and Alice guessed who it was, even before
she got into the court, by the way the people near the door began
sneezing all at once.

  `Give your evidence,' said the King.

  `Shan't,' said the cook.

  The King looked anxiously at the White Rabbit, who said in a
low voice, `Your Majesty must cross-examine THIS witness.'

  `Well, if I must, I must,' the King said, with a melancholy
air, and, after folding his arms and frowning at the cook till
his eyes were nearly out of sight, he said in a deep voice, `What
are tarts made of?'

  `Pepper, mostly,' said the cook.

  `Treacle,' said a sleepy voice behind her.

  `Collar that Dormouse,' the Queen shrieked out.  `Behead that
Dormouse!  Turn that Dormouse out of court!  Suppress him!  Pinch
him!  Off with his whiskers!'

  For some minutes the whole court was in confusion, getting the
Dormouse turned out, and, by the time they had settled down
again, the cook had disappeared.

  `Never mind!' said the King, with an air of great relief.
`Call the next witness.'  And he added in an undertone to the
Queen, `Really, my dear, YOU must cross-examine the next witness.
It quite makes my forehead ache!'

  Alice watched the White Rabbit as he fumbled over the list,
feeling very curious to see what the next witness would be like,
`--for they haven't got much evidence YET,' she said to herself.
Imagine her surprise, when the White Rabbit read out, at the top
of his shrill little voice, the name `Alice!'



= CHAPTER XII =
=( Alice's Evidence )=


  `Here!' cried Alice, quite forgetting in the flurry of the
moment how large she had grown in the last few minutes, and she
jumped up in such a hurry that she tipped over the jury-box with
the edge of her skirt, upsetting all the jurymen on to the heads
of the crowd below, and there they lay sprawling about, reminding
her very much of a globe of goldfish she had accidentally upset
the week before.

  `Oh, I BEG your pardon!' she exclaimed in a tone of great
dismay, and began picking them up again as quickly as she could,
for the accident of the goldfish kept running in her head, and
she had a vague sort of idea that they must be collected at once
and put back into the jury-box, or they would die.

  `The trial cannot proceed,' said the King in a very grave
voice, `until all the jurymen are back in their proper places--
ALL,' he repeated with great emphasis, looking hard at Alice as
he said do.

  Alice looked at the jury-box, and saw that, in her haste, she
had put the Lizard in head downwards, and the poor little thing
was waving its tail about in a melancholy way, being quite unable
to move.  She soon got it out again, and put it right; `not that
it signifies much,' she said to herself; `I should think it
would be QUITE as much use in the trial one way up as the other.'

  As soon as the jury had a little recovered from the shock of
being upset, and their slates and pencils had been found and
handed back to them, they set to work very diligently to write
out a history of the accident, all except the Lizard, who seemed
too much overcome to do anything but sit with its mouth open,
gazing up into the roof of the court.

  `What do you know about this business?' the King said to
Alice.

  `Nothing,' said Alice.

  `Nothing WHATEVER?' persisted the King.

  `Nothing whatever,' said Alice.

  `That's very important,' the King said, turning to the jury.
They were just beginning to write this down on their slates, when
the White Rabbit interrupted:  `UNimportant, your Majesty means,
of course,' he said in a very respectful tone, but frowning and
making faces at him as he spoke.

  `UNimportant, of course, I meant,' the King hastily said, and
went on to himself in an undertone, `important--unimportant--
unimportant--important--' as if he were trying which word
sounded best.

  Some of the jury wrote it down `important,' and some
`unimportant.'  Alice could see this, as she was near enough to
look over their slates; `but it doesn't matter a bit,' she
thought to herself.

  At this moment the King, who had been for some time busily
writing in his note-book, cackled out `Silence!' and read out
from his book, `Rule Forty-two.  ALL PERSONS MORE THAN A MILE
HIGH TO LEAVE THE COURT.'

  Everybody looked at Alice.

  `I'M not a mile high,' said Alice.

  `You are,' said the King.

  `Nearly two miles high,' added the Queen.

  `Well, I shan't go, at any rate,' said Alice:  `besides,
that's not a regular rule:  you invented it just now.'

  `It's the oldest rule in the book,' said the King.

  `Then it ought to be Number One,' said Alice.

  The King turned pale, and shut his note-book hastily.
`Consider your verdict,' he said to the jury, in a low, trembling
voice.

  `There's more evidence to come yet, please your Majesty,' said
the White Rabbit, jumping up in a great hurry; `this paper has
just been picked up.'

  `What's in it?' said the Queen.

  `I haven't opened it yet,' said the White Rabbit, `but it seems
to be a letter, written by the prisoner to--to somebody.'

  `It must have been that,' said the King, `unless it was
written to nobody, which isn't usual, you know.'

  `Who is it directed to?' said one of the jurymen.

  `It isn't directed at all,' said the White Rabbit; `in fact,
there's nothing written on the OUTSIDE.'  He unfolded the paper
as he spoke, and added `It isn't a letter, after all:  it's a set
of verses.'

  `Are they in the prisoner's handwriting?' asked another of
the jurymen.

  `No, they're not,' said the White Rabbit, `and that's the
queerest thing about it.'  (The jury all looked puzzled.)

  `He must have imitated somebody else's hand,' said the King.
(The jury all brightened up again.)

  `Please your Majesty,' said the Knave, `I didn't write it, and
they can't prove I did:  there's no name signed at the end.'

  `If you didn't sign it,' said the King, `that only makes the
matter worse.  You MUST have meant some mischief, or else you'd
have signed your name like an honest man.'

  There was a general clapping of hands at this:  it was the
first really clever thing the King had said that day.

  `That PROVES his guilt,' said the Queen.

  `It proves nothing of the sort!' said Alice.  `Why, you don't
even know what they're about!'

  `Read them,' said the King.

  The White Rabbit put on his spectacles.  `Where shall I begin,
please your Majesty?' he asked.

  `Begin at the beginning,' the King said gravely, `and go on
till you come to the end:  then stop.'

  These were the verses the White Rabbit read:--

        `They told me you had been to her,
          And mentioned me to him:
        She gave me a good character,
          But said I could not swim.

        He sent them word I had not gone
          (We know it to be true):
        If she should push the matter on,
          What would become of you?

        I gave her one, they gave him two,
          You gave us three or more;
        They all returned from him to you,
          Though they were mine before.

        If I or she should chance to be
          Involved in this affair,
        He trusts to you to set them free,
          Exactly as we were.

        My notion was that you had been
          (Before she had this fit)
        An obstacle that came between
          Him, and ourselves, and it.

        Don't let him know she liked them best,
          For this must ever be
        A secret, kept from all the rest,
          Between yourself and me.'

  `That's the most important piece of evidence we've heard yet,'
said the King, rubbing his hands; `so now let the jury--'

  `If any one of them can explain it,' said Alice, (she had
grown so large in the last few minutes that she wasn't a bit
afraid of interrupting him,) `I'll give him sixpence.  _I_ don't
believe there's an atom of meaning in it.'

  The jury all wrote down on their slates, `SHE doesn't believe
there's an atom of meaning in it,' but none of them attempted to
explain the paper.

  `If there's no meaning in it,' said the King, `that saves a
world of trouble, you know, as we needn't try to find any.  And
yet I don't know,' he went on, spreading out the verses on his
knee, and looking at them with one eye; `I seem to see some
meaning in them, after all.  "--SAID I COULD NOT SWIM--" you
can't swim, can you?' he added, turning to the Knave.

  The Knave shook his head sadly.  `Do I look like it?' he said.
(Which he certainly did NOT, being made entirely of cardboard.)

  `All right, so far,' said the King, and he went on muttering
over the verses to himself:  `"WE KNOW IT TO BE TRUE--" that's
the jury, of course-- "I GAVE HER ONE, THEY GAVE HIM TWO--" why,
that must be what he did with the tarts, you know--'

  `But, it goes on "THEY ALL RETURNED FROM HIM TO YOU,"' said
Alice.

  `Why, there they are!' said the King triumphantly, pointing to
the tarts on the table.  `Nothing can be clearer than THAT.
Then again--"BEFORE SHE HAD THIS FIT--"  you never had fits, my
dear, I think?' he said to the Queen.

  `Never!' said the Queen furiously, throwing an inkstand at the
Lizard as she spoke.  (The unfortunate little Bill had left off
writing on his slate with one finger, as he found it made no
mark; but he now hastily began again, using the ink, that was
trickling down his face, as long as it lasted.)

  `Then the words don't FIT you,' said the King, looking round
the court with a smile.  There was a dead silence.

  `It's a pun!' the King added in an offended tone, and
everybody laughed, `Let the jury consider their verdict,' the
King said, for about the twentieth time that day.

  `No, no!' said the Queen.  `Sentence first--verdict afterwards.'

  `Stuff and nonsense!' said Alice loudly.  `The idea of having
the sentence first!'

  `Hold your tongue!' said the Queen, turning purple.

  `I won't!' said Alice.

  `Off with her head!' the Queen shouted at the top of her voice.
Nobody moved.

  `Who cares for you?' said Alice, (she had grown to her full
size by this time.)  `You're nothing but a pack of cards!'

  At this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came flying
down upon her:  she gave a little scream, half of fright and half
of anger, and tried to beat them off, and found herself lying on
the bank, with her head in the lap of her sister, who was gently
brushing away some dead leaves that had fluttered down from the
trees upon her face.

  `Wake up, Alice dear!' said her sister; `Why, what a long
sleep you've had!'

  `Oh, I've had such a curious dream!' said Alice, and she told
her sister, as well as she could remember them, all these strange
Adventures of hers that you have just been reading about; and
when she had finished, her sister kissed her, and said, `It WAS a
curious dream, dear, certainly:  but now run in to your tea; it's
getting late.'  So Alice got up and ran off, thinking while she
ran, as well she might, what a wonderful dream it had been.

  But her sister sat still just as she left her, leaning her
head on her hand, watching the setting sun, and thinking of
little Alice and all her wonderful Adventures, till she too began
dreaming after a fashion, and this was her dream:--

  First, she dreamed of little Alice herself, and once again the
tiny hands were clasped upon her knee, and the bright eager eyes
were looking up into hers--she could hear the very tones of her
voice, and see that queer little toss of her head to keep back
the wandering hair that WOULD always get into her eyes--and
still as she listened, or seemed to listen, the whole place
around her became alive the strange creatures of her little
sister's dream.

  The long grass rustled at her feet as the White Rabbit hurried
by--the frightened Mouse splashed his way through the
neighbouring pool--she could hear the rattle of the teacups as
the March Hare and his friends shared their never-ending meal,
and the shrill voice of the Queen ordering off her unfortunate
guests to execution--once more the pig-baby was sneezing on the
Duchess's knee, while plates and dishes crashed around it--once
more the shriek of the Gryphon, the squeaking of the Lizard's
slate-pencil, and the choking of the suppressed guinea-pigs,
filled the air, mixed up with the distant sobs of the miserable
Mock Turtle.

  So she sat on, with closed eyes, and half believed herself in
Wonderland, though she knew she had but to open them again, and
all would change to dull reality--the grass would be only
rustling in the wind, and the pool rippling to the waving of the
reeds--the rattling teacups would change to tinkling sheep-
bells, and the Queen's shrill cries to the voice of the shepherd
boy--and the sneeze of the baby, the shriek of the Gryphon, and
all the other queer noises, would change (she knew) to the
confused clamour of the busy farm-yard--while the lowing of the
cattle in the distance would take the place of the Mock Turtle's
heavy sobs.

  Lastly, she pictured to herself how this same little sister of
hers would, in the after-time, be herself a grown woman; and how
she would keep, through all her riper years, the simple and
loving heart of her childhood:  and how she would gather about
her other little children, and make THEIR eyes bright and eager
with many a strange tale, perhaps even with the dream of
Wonderland of long ago:  and how she would feel with all their
simple sorrows, and find a pleasure in all their simple joys,
remembering her own child-life, and the happy summer days.

                             THE END


TXT_BOOK_V: 0.2.0
PUB-DATE: 1865-11-26

@ default: default (2021-03-08 8:00) = 124:10. "This is the default bookmark aka. last reading position."
@ timo: very_interesting (2021-08-03 9:30) = 500:5. "Very interesting word."

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The grateful elephant
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The grateful elephant
        And other stories translated from the Pāli

Author: Eugene Watson Burlingame

Illustrator: Dorothy Pulis Lathrop

Release date: July 18, 2024 [eBook #74064]

Language: English

Original publication: New Haven: Yale University Press, 1923

Credits: Susan E., David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GRATEFUL ELEPHANT ***





_The Grateful Elephant_




_By the same author_:


  BUDDHIST PARABLES. Translated from the original Pāli. One volume.
    xxix + 348 pages. With photogravure of a Bodhisattva head from
    Gandhāra, from original in the Pennsylvania Museum. Octavo. Cloth.
    Yale University Press, 1922. $5.00.

  BUDDHIST LEGENDS. Translated from the original Pāli text of the
    Dhammapada Commentary. Three volumes. Harvard Oriental Series, 28,
    29, 30. 1114 pages. Octavo. Cloth. Harvard University Press, 1921.
    $15.00 a set.




[Illustration: _Then the elephant with his trunk caressed the Future
Buddha and lifted him up._]




  _The Grateful Elephant_

  _And Other Stories Translated from the Pāli_

  _By Eugene Watson Burlingame_

  _with Illustrations by Dorothy Lathrop_

  [Illustration]

  _New Haven, Yale University Press_
  _London, Humphrey Milford, Oxford University Press_
  _Mcmxxiii_




  _Copyright 1923 by Yale University Press._

  _Printed in the United States of America._




_To my nephew Westcott_




This _book contains twenty-six stories selected from the author’s
larger work_ Buddhist Parables, _Yale University Press, 1922. The
translation is a close, idiomatic rendering of the original Pāli text.
In a few cases, words and phrases have been softened, and sentences
have been omitted. In Story 1, two whole paragraphs which interrupt the
progress of the story have been omitted. The author has not, however,
“written down” any of the stories in order to remove such difficulties
as the original translation may present to the child._




_Note on Pronunciation of Pāli Names._


The quantity of vowels is marked throughout. Short _a_ is pronounced
like _u_ in _but_, long _ā_ like _a_ in _father_, long _ī_ like _ee_ in
_see_, long _ū_ like _oo_ in _too_, short _i_ and short _u_ differing
from the corresponding long vowels not in sound but in length. The _u_
in _Buddha_, for example, is short. Simple consonants are pronounced as
in English, except that _c_ is pronounced like _ch_ in _church_, _g_
as in _get_, and _j_ as in _judge_. Combinations like _th_ and _dh_
should be pronounced as in _hothouse_ and _madhouse_. Names containing
underdotted letters have been eliminated. A syllable is said to be long
if it contains either a long vowel, or a short vowel followed by two
consonants (except a consonant followed by _h_). Words of three or more
syllables are accented on the second syllable from the last, provided
the next to the last syllable is short, as _Gótama_, _Mállika_. If
the next to the last syllable is long, it receives the accent, as
_Brahmadátta_, _Nibbāna_.




_Contents._


                                                                    PAGE

  Note on pronunciation of Pāli names                               viii

  List of illustrations                                             xiii

  Introduction                                                        xv

  Note on the illustrations                                         xxix

   1. The grateful elephant                       Jā. 156: ii. 17      1
        _Where there’s a will, there’s a way_

   2. Grateful animals and ungrateful man          Jā. 73: i. 322      9
        _Driftwood is worth more than some men_

   3. Elephant and ungrateful forester             Jā. 72: i. 319     19
        _The whole earth will not satisfy an ungrateful
          man_

   4. Quail, crow, fly, frog, and elephants     Jā. 357: iii. 174     26
        _The biter bit_

   5. Quails and fowler                            Jā. 33: i. 208     30
        _In union there is strength_

   6. Brahmadatta and the prince                      Vin. i. 342     33
        _Love your enemies_

   7. Antelope, woodpecker, tortoise, and hunter Jā. 206: ii. 152     48
        _In union there is strength_

   8. Brahmadatta and Mallika                      Jā. 151: ii. 1     52
        _Overcome evil with good_

   9. A Buddhist Tar-baby                          Jā. 55: i. 272     58
        _Keep the Precepts_

  10. Vedabbha and the thieves                     Jā. 48: i. 252     64
        _Cupidity is the root of ruin_

  11. The anger-eating ogre                             S. i. 237     72
        _Refrain from anger_

  12. The patient woman                             M. 21: i. 125     75
        _Patient is as patient does_

  13. Blind men and elephant                            Udāna, 66     79
        _Avoid vain wrangling_

  14. King and boar                                                   83
        _Evil communications corrupt good manners_

      Part 1. Gem, hatchet, drum, and bowl       Jā. 186: ii. 101
      Part 2. Corrupt fruit from a good tree     Jā. 186: ii. 104

  15. A Buddhist Henny-Penny                     Jā. 322: iii. 74     92
        _Much ado about nothing_

  16. The birds (cf. 17)                            Vin. iii. 147     97
        _Nobody loves a beggar_

  17. Dragon Jewel-neck                                               99
        _Nobody loves a beggar_

      A. Canonical version                          Vin. iii. 145
      B. Uncanonical version                     Jā. 253: ii. 283

  18. Snake-charm                                                    107
        _A blessing upon all living beings!_

      A. Canonical version                           Vin. ii. 109
      B. Uncanonical version                     Jā. 203: ii. 144

  19. Partridge, monkey, and elephant                                114
        _Reverence your elders_

      A. Canonical version                           Vin. ii. 161
      B. Uncanonical version                       Jā. 37: i. 217

  20. The hawk      119
        _Walk not in forbidden ground_

      A. Canonical version                              S. v. 146
      B. Uncanonical version                      Jā. 168: ii. 58

  21. How not to hit an insect                                       124
        _Better an enemy with sense than a friend without it_

      A. Boy and mosquito                          Jā. 44: i. 246
      B. Girl and fly                              Jā. 45: i. 248

  22. Monkey-gardeners                                               129
        _Misdirected effort spells failure_

      A. One-stanza version                        Jā. 46: i. 249
      B. Three-stanza version                    Jā. 268: ii. 345

  23. Two dicers                                                     135
        _Take care!_

      A. Canonical version                             D. ii. 348
      B. Uncanonical version                       Jā. 91: i. 379

  24. Two caravan-leaders                                            138
        _Be prudent!_

      A. Canonical version                             D. ii. 342
      B. Uncanonical version                         Jā. 1: i. 95

  25. Boar and lion                          Kathāsaritsāgara, 72    154
        _Eat me, O lion!_

  26. Fairy-prince and griffin        Kathāsaritsāgara, 22 and 90    157
        _Eat me, O griffin!_

  Glossary                                                           169




_List of Illustrations._


  _Story_                                                       _Facing_

   1. The grateful elephant                                 _Title-page_
        _Then the elephant with his trunk caressed the
          Future Buddha and lifted him up_

   2. Grateful animals and ungrateful man                             12
        _Thus did those four persons travel together,
          swept along by the river_

   3. Elephant and ungrateful forester                                22
        _The man actually cut off his two principal tusks!_

   7. Antelope, woodpecker, tortoise, and hunter                      50
        _At that moment the tortoise had chewed all of the
          strips except just one strap_

   9. A Buddhist Tar-baby                                             60
        _Then he hit him with a spear_

  11. The anger-eating ogre                                           72
       “_Here, Sire, a certain ogre, ill-favored, dwarfish,
          sits in your seat_”

  14. King and boar                                                   86
        _He bit the gem, and by its magical power rose
          into the air_

  15. A Buddhist Henny-Penny                                          96
        _So taking the little hare on his back, he sprang
          forward with the speed of a lion_

  17. Dragon Jewel-neck                                              104
        _Every day Jewel-neck the dragon-king would
          encircle him with his coils_

  22. Monkey-gardeners                                               130
       “_When you water the young trees, pull them up
          by the roots, every one_”




_Introduction._


These stories are said to have been related by Gotama Buddha for the
purpose of conveying to his hearers moral and religious lessons and the
lessons of common sense.

Gotama Buddha was born nearly twenty-five centuries ago in the city of
Kapila, in Northeast India. Kapila was the principal city of the Sakya
tribe, and his father was king of the tribe. _Gotama_ was his family
name. _Buddha_ means _Awakened_ or _Enlightened_, that is to say,
awakened or enlightened to the cause and the cure of human suffering.

The Buddhist Scriptures tell us that when Gotama was born, the angels
rejoiced and sang. An aged wise man inquired: “Why doth the company of
angels rejoice?” They replied: “He that shall become Buddha is born in
the village of the Sakyas for the welfare and happiness of mankind;
therefore are we joyful and exceeding glad.”

The wise man hastened to the king’s house, and said: “Where is the
child? I, too, wish to see him.” They showed him the child. When he saw
the child, he rejoiced and was exceeding glad. And he took him in his
arms, and said: “Without an equal is he! foremost among men!” Then,
because he was an old man, and knew that he was soon to die, he became
sorrowful and wept tears.

Said the Sakyas: “Will any harm come to the child?” “No,” replied the
wise man, “this child shall one day become Buddha; out of love and
pity for mankind he shall set in motion the Wheel of Religion; far and
wide shall his religion be spread. But as for me, I have not long to
live; before these things shall come to pass, death will be upon me.
Therefore am I stricken with woe, overwhelmed with sorrow, afflicted
with grief.”

Seven days after Gotama was born, his mother died, and he was brought
up by his aunt and step-mother. When he was nineteen years old, he
married his own cousin. For ten years he lived a life of ease, in
the enjoyment of all the comforts and luxuries which riches and high
position could give him. When he was twenty-nine years old, a change
came over him.

       *       *       *       *       *

For many centuries, it has been a common belief in India that when a
human being dies, he is at once born again. If he has lived a good
life, he will be born again on earth as the child of a king or of a
rich man, or in one of the heavens as a god. If he has lived an evil
life, he will be born again as a ghost, or as an animal, or in some
place of torment.

According to this belief, every person has been born and has lived and
died so many times that it would be impossible to count the number.
Indeed, so far back into the past does this series of lives extend that
it is impossible even to imagine a beginning of the series. What is
more to the point, in each of these lives every person has endured much
suffering and misery.

Said the Buddha: “In weeping over the death of sons and daughters and
other dear ones, every person, in the course of his past lives, has
shed tears more abundant than all the water contained in the four great
oceans.”

And again: “The bones left by a single person in the course of his
past lives would form a pile so huge that were all the mountains to be
gathered up and piled in a heap, that heap of mountains would appear as
nothing beside it.”

And again: “The head of every person has been cut off so many times
in the course of his past lives, either as a human being or as an
animal, as to cause him to shed blood more abundant than all the water
contained in the four great oceans.”

Nothing more terrible than this can be imagined. Yet for many centuries
it has been a common belief in India. Wise men taught that there was
a way of escape, a way of salvation. If a person wished to avoid
repeated lives of suffering and misery, he must leave home and family
and friends, become a monk, and devote himself to fasting, bodily
torture, and meditation.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Buddhist Scriptures tell us that when Gotama was twenty-nine years
old, he saw for the first time an Old Man, a Sick Man, a Dead Man, and
a Monk. The thought that in the course of his past lives he had endured
old age, sickness, and death, times without number, terrified him, and
he resolved to become a monk.

Leaving home and wife and son, he devoted himself for six years to
fasting, bodily torture, and meditation. Finally he became convinced
that fasting and bodily torture were not the way of salvation, and
abandoned the struggle. One night he had a wonderful experience. First
he saw the entire course of his past lives. Next he saw the fate after
death of all living beings. Finally he came to understand the cause of
human suffering and the cure for it.

Thus it was that he became Buddha, the Awakened, the Enlightened. He
saw that the cause of rebirth and suffering was craving for worldly
pleasures and life and riches. He saw that if this craving were
uprooted, rebirth and suffering would come to an end. He saw that this
craving could be uprooted by right belief, right living, and meditation.

       *       *       *       *       *

For forty-five years the Buddha journeyed from place to place,
preaching and teaching. He founded an order of monks and nuns, and won
many converts. He lived to be eighty years old. Missionaries carried
his teachings from India to Ceylon and Burma and China and Tibet and
Japan. In a few hundred years the religion of the Buddha had spread
over the whole of Asia. Hundreds of millions of human beings have
accepted his teachings.

In at least two respects, the teachings of the Buddha were quite
remarkable. In the first place, he insisted on the virtue of
moderation. He urged upon his hearers to avoid the two extremes
of a life devoted to fasting and self-torture, and a life of
self-indulgence. In the second place, he taught that a man must love
his neighbor as himself, returning good for evil and love for hatred.
But this was not all. He taught men to love all living creatures
without respect of kind or person. He taught men not to injure or
kill any living creature, whether a human being or an animal, even in
self-defense. All war, according to the teaching of the Buddha, is
unholy.

In the course of time it came to be believed that Gotama had become
Buddha as the fruit of good deeds performed in countless previous
states of existence, especially deeds of generosity. At any time, had
he so desired, he might have uprooted craving for worldly pleasures and
life and riches by meditation, and thus have escaped the sufferings of
repeated states of existence. But this he deemed an unworthy course.
Out of pity and compassion and friendliness for living creatures, he
preferred to be reborn again and again, to suffer and to die again and
again, in order that, by the accumulated merit of good works, he might
himself become enlightened and thus be able to enlighten others.

In comparison with the career of the Future Buddha, devoted to the
performance of good works, unselfish, generous to the point of
sacrificing his own body and blood,--the career of the monk, isolated
from the world, selfish, seeking by meditation to uproot craving
for worldly pleasures and life and riches, seemed low and mean. The
disciple began to imitate his Master. Thus began the Higher Career or
Vehicle of Mahāyāna or Catholic Buddhism, as distinguished from the
Lower Career or Vehicle of the more primitive Hīnayāna Buddhism of the
Pāli texts. Thus did the quest of Buddhahood supplant the quest of
Nibbāna. This development took place long before the beginning of the
Christian era.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gotama Buddha made frequent use of similes, allegories, parables,
fables, and other stories, to illustrate his teachings. His example
was imitated by his followers, and in the course of time hundreds and
hundreds of stories were attributed to him on general principles. Most
of these stories were, in their original form, nothing but simple
folk-tales, many of them of great antiquity. Parallels and variants
are found in the Mahābhārata, the Panchatantra, Bidpai’s Fables, the
Hitopadesha, the Kathāsaritsāgara, and other fiction-collections,
especially those of the Jains.

Of the twenty-six stories contained in this book, of eight of which two
versions are given, eleven stories or versions of stories (6, 11, 12,
13, 16, 17 _a_, 18 _a_, 19 _a_, 20 _a_, 23 _a_, 24 _a_) are taken from
the oldest canonical texts of the Buddhist Sacred Scriptures. Of these
eleven stories, the first nine are said to have been related by Gotama
himself, the last two being attributed to the Buddhist sage Kumāra
Kassapa. It is highly probable that the tradition embodied in the texts
regarding these eleven stories is correct. We may therefore feel quite
certain that such remarkable parables as _Brahmadatta and the prince_
(6), _Blind men and elephant_ (13), and _The birds_ (16) were actually
related by Gotama himself, in substantially the same form as that in
which we now have them. It is not at all unlikely that such a parable
as _Brahmadatta and Mallika_ (8) was also related by Gotama, but of
this we cannot be certain.

The approximate date of these old canonical texts is now well
established. Numerous references to the Buddhist Scriptures in the
Bhābrā edict of Asoka, about 250 B.C., and in the canonical work
_Kathāvatthu_, of about the same date, amply justify the statement
that the texts from which these eleven stories are taken are, in
their present form, at least three or four centuries anterior to the
Christian era. It may interest the reader to know that these texts,
originating in North India in the lifetime of Gotama, were handed down
by oral tradition for many generations, were reduced to canonical form
within a century or two of the death of Gotama, were carried to Ceylon
in the third century B.C., were written down for the first time in the
first century B.C., and were copied and recopied on palm-leaves by
successive generations of scribes until comparatively recent times.

The rest of the stories (except 25 and 26) are taken from the _Book of
the Buddha’s Previous Existences_ or _Jātaka Book_. This remarkable
work, which also originated in North India, relates in mixed prose
and verse the experiences of the Future Buddha in each of 550 states
of existence previous to his rebirth as Gotama. The received text of
this work represents a recension made in Ceylon early in the fifth
century A.D., but much of the material is demonstrably many centuries
older. For example, the stanzas rank as canonical Scripture, older
versions of some of the stories occur in the canonical texts, and
many of the stories (including 4 and 7 and 22) are illustrated by
Bharahat sculptures of the third century B.C. Stories 25 and 26 are
also _Jātaka_ tales, adapted from C. H. Tawney’s translation of the
_Kathāsaritsāgara_.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the most part, the _Jātaka_ stories purport to relate incidents in
Gotama’s previous states of existence as a human being. For example,
as Prince Noble-heart (1), he triumphs over his enemies and succeeds
to the throne of his father through the kindly offices of a grateful
elephant. As a Brahman’s son (2), he befriends in turn a pampered
prince, a snake, a rat, and a parrot, with the result that he is basely
betrayed by the prince, but treated with profound gratitude by the
three animals.

As King Brahmadatta (8), he overcomes anger with kindness, evil with
good, the stingy with gifts, and the liar with truth. As Prince
Five-weapons (9), he overcomes the giant ogre Sticky-hair with the
Weapon of Knowledge. As a Brahman’s son (17 _b_), he frees his younger
brother from the power of Jewel-neck, the dragon-king. As a Brahman’s
son (18 _b_), he teaches friendliness for all living beings. As a
caravan-leader (24 _b_), he protects his companions from a troop of
man-eating ogres. As Jīmūta-vāhana, prince of the fairies (26), he
offers the sacrifice of his body and blood for the welfare of all
living beings.

Several of the stories purport to relate incidents in Gotama’s previous
states of existence as an animal. For example, as a generous elephant
(3), he gives his tusks to an ungrateful forester who has betrayed
him. As a merciful elephant (4), he spares the life of a tiny quail.
As a wise quail (5), he avoids the snares of a fowler. As a brave lion
(15), he averts the destruction of a host of frightened animals. As a
wise partridge (19 _b_), he serves as the preceptor of a monkey and an
elephant. As a wise quail (20 _b_), he outwits a hawk. As a wise boar
(25), he offers the sacrifice of his body and blood.

       *       *       *       *       *

How did the Future Buddha come to be identified with the hero of each
of these stories? The stories themselves give us the answer. For
example, in the story of _Brahmadatta and the prince_ (6), we read
that a high-minded prince generously forgave the murderer of his father
and mother, returning good for evil and love for hatred. In this, the
oldest form of the story, the Future Buddha is not even mentioned. But
in a later form of the story, _Jātaka_ 371, we are expressly told that
the generous prince was none other than the Future Buddha.

Stories 17, 18, 19, 20, 23, and 24 illustrate the same process in a
very striking way. Of each of these stories we have two versions, an
earlier version from a canonical source, and a later version from an
uncanonical source. It will be observed that in the older versions
the Future Buddha is not mentioned at all. But in the later versions
he is identified in turn with a wise ascetic (17 _b_, 18 _b_), a wise
partridge (19 _b_), a wise quail (20 _b_), an honest dicer (23 _b_),
and a wise caravan-leader (24 _b_).

Originally a simple folk-tale, each of these stories has been converted
into a birth-story by the simple literary device of identifying the
highest and noblest character in the story with the Future Buddha.
This, of course, was a comparatively easy matter, for the Future
Buddha, in his previous states of existence, was believed to have
exhibited the qualities of wisdom, courage, and generosity, and there
are few of the stories in which at least one of the characters does not
exhibit one or another of these qualities.

The attempt to introduce the Future Buddha into the stories is not
always carried out in a way to satisfy or convince the reader.
Thus, as an honest dicer (23 _b_), he violates Buddhist teaching by
administering deadly poison to his companion, a dishonest dicer. The
latter must not, of course, be allowed to die. The honest dicer is
therefore made to administer an emetic to his companion and to admonish
him. As a wise quail (20 _b_), he again violates Buddhist teaching
by saving his own life at the expense of his enemy’s life. Here the
inconsistency is allowed to stand, and the story is used to illustrate
the folly of walking in forbidden ground.

In the case of some of the stories, the figure of the Future Buddha is,
so to speak, lugged in by the heels. For example, little or nothing is
gained by identifying the antelope caught in a trap (7) with the Future
Buddha. As a Brahman’s pupil (10), and as a king’s counsellor (14), the
Future Buddha offers only a word of advice. As a trader (21), and as
a wise man (22), he is merely a spectator, and contents himself with
remarking on the folly of misdirected effort. It is quite clear that in
the case of these stories also we are dealing with simple folk-tales
which have undergone only slight modification.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some of the stories have traveled all over the world. In the
thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth centuries, many of them found
their way into the highways and byways of European literature. With
Story 1, _The grateful elephant_, compare the story of Androclus
and the lion, Aesop’s fable of the Lion and the Shepherd, and Gesta
Romanorum 104. With Story 2, _Grateful animals and ungrateful man_,
compare R. Schmidt, Panchatantra i. 9; C. H. Tawney, Kathāsaritsāgara
ii. 103; E. Chavannes, Cinq Cents Contes 25; A. Schiefner, Tibetan
Tales 26; Gesta Romanorum 119; and the following stories in Grimm,
Kinder- und Hausmärchen: 17 Die weisse Schlange, 60 Die zwei Brüder,
62 Die Bienenkönigin, 85 Die Goldkinder, 107 Die beiden Wanderer,
126 Ferenand getrü und Ferenand ungetrü, 191 Das Meerhäschen. For
additional parallels, see J. Bolte und G. Polivka, Anmerkungen zu den
Kinder- und Hausmärchen der Brüder Grimm, Märchen 17, 62, 191.

With Story 3, _Elephant and ungrateful forester_, compare E. Chavannes,
Cinq Cents Contes 28. With Story 4, _Quail, crow, fly, frog, and
elephants_, compare R. Schmidt, Panchatantra i. 18. Variants of
Stories 5 and 7 form the frame-story of Panchatantra ii. With Story 5,
_Quails and fowler_, compare C. H. Tawney, Kathāsaritsāgara ii. 48;
J. Hertel, Tantrākhyāyika iii. 11; also Aesop’s fable of the Falconer
and the Birds. With Story 7, _Antelope, woodpecker, tortoise, and
hunter_, compare Mahābhārata xii. 138; C. H. Tawney, Kathāsaritsāgara
i. 296; also Aesop’s fable of the Lion and the Mouse. With Story 6,
_Brahmadatta and the prince_, compare E. Chavannes, Cinq Cents Contes
10; also Jātaka 371. With Story 8, _Brahmadatta and Mallika_, compare
Mahābhārata iii. 194.

With Story 9, _A Buddhist Tar-baby_, compare E. Chavannes, Cinq Cents
Contes 89 and 410; also the well-known story in Joel Chandler Harris,
Uncle Remus, His Songs and His Sayings. Story 10, _Vedabbha and the
thieves_, is the original of Chaucer’s Pardoner’s Tale; compare also A.
Schiefner, Tibetan Tales 19. With Story 13, _Blind men and elephant_,
compare E. Chavannes, Cinq Cents Contes 86. With Story 14, Part 1,
_Gem, hatchet, drum, and bowl_, compare Grimm, Kinder- und Hausmärchen:
36 Tischchen deck dich, Goldesel, und Knüppel aus dem Sack; 54 Der
Ranzen, das Hütlein, und das Hörnlein. For additional parallels, see
Bolte-Polivka.

With Story 15, _A Buddhist Henny-Penny_, compare A. Schiefner, Tibetan
Tales 22; also the well-known children’s story of the same name. With
Story 19, _Partridge, monkey, and elephant_, compare A. Schiefner,
Tibetan Tales 24. With Story 21, _How not to kill an insect_, compare
Aesop’s fable of the Bald Man and the Fly. For an interesting account
of the history of some of the stories, see W. A. Clouston, _Popular
Tales and Fictions_, as follows: Story 2: i. 223-241. Story 9: i.
133-154. Story 10: ii. 379-407. Story 14: i. 110-122. Story 15: i.
289-313. Story 21: i. 55-57.




_Note on the Illustrations._


Just fifty years ago Sir Alexander Cunningham discovered among the
ruins of a memorial mound or stūpa near the village of Bharahat, 120
miles southwest of Allahabad, a series of sculptures of the third
century B.C., illustrating the legendary life of the Buddha and stories
from the _Book of the Buddha’s Previous Existences_ or _Jātaka Book_.
Photographs of these sculptures, together with a detailed description
of each, will be found in the explorer’s monumental work _Stūpa of
Bharhut_.

It is from these Bharahat sculptures that the artist has taken most of
the materials for the illustrations to the present volume. From these
sculptures have been taken, not only three entire scenes, but animals,
costumes, trees, plants, fruits, flowers, and other objects. In the
case of two scenes, where the sculptured objects differ materially
from the objects described in the text, the artist has followed
the sculptures rather than the text. In the matter of details, the
illustrations are believed to be correct in every particular.

The design which appears on the cover, and again on the title-page,
_Elephant and children_, is taken from Cunningham, Plate xxxiii. 2,
_Elephant and monkeys_. The Bharahat sculpture represents an elephant
being driven along by a troop of monkeys. The artist has substituted
children for monkeys, but has preserved the spirit of the scene. It may
as well be said here as anywhere else that the saffron yellow of the
cover is the exact color of the robes of a Buddhist monk. The color is
therefore symbolic.

The frontispiece, illustrating Story 1, _The grateful elephant_,
represents the scene in the elephant-stable. A pure white elephant is
shown in the act of raising the young prince, the Future Buddha, to his
shoulders. On the right stands the queen, under a parasol held by an
attendant. On the left stand ministers of state, ladies-in-waiting,
and slaves. The open window, through which the blue sky is seen, forms
an effective panel for the portrait of the young prince. The saffron
yellow of the background is again symbolic.

The illustration to Story 2, _Grateful animals and ungrateful man_,
represents the pampered prince astride of a tree-trunk, accompanied by
his three companions, a snake, a rat, and a parrot, swept along by the
river amid storm and darkness.

The illustration to Story 3, _Elephant and forester_, shows the Future
Buddha, in the form of a pure white elephant, reclining like a cow,
and willingly permitting the ungrateful forester to cut off his two
tusks. Trees.--Left middle: Pātali-tree, Trumpet Flower, _Bignonia
Suaveolens_, the Bo-tree of the Buddha Vipassi. See Cunningham, Plates
xxiii. 3 and xxix. 1. Centre over elephant: Probably the Sāl-tree,
_Shorea Robusta_, the Bo-tree of the Buddha Vessabhu. The mother of
Gotama is said to have stood upright at his birth and to have supported
herself by a branch of a Sāl-tree. See Cunningham, Plate xxix. 2 and
5. Over elephant’s head: Fan-palm, _Borassus Flabelliformis_. See
Cunningham, Plate xxx. 4. Right middle: Probably a Sandalwood-tree,
Candana. See Cunningham, Plate lvii. Lower left: Magnolia. See
Cunningham, Plate xxv. 1 (above archer).

The illustration to Story 7, _Antelope, woodpecker, tortoise, and
hunter_, is taken from Cunningham, Plate xxvii. 9. As the hunter
approaches, the tortoise releases the antelope from the trap, and the
antelope springs to a place of safety. In drawing the trap, the artist
has followed the sculptured model, rather than the description in the
text. The tree in the background is the Sirīsa-tree, _Acacia Sirisa_,
more properly, _Albizzia Lebbek_, the Bo-tree of the Buddha Kakusandha.
See Cunningham, Plate xxix. 3.

The illustration to Story 9, _A Buddhist Tar-baby_, represents the
Future Buddha in the person of Prince Five-weapons casting a spear at
the giant ogre Sticky-hair. The drawing of the ogre follows closely
the description given in the text. The tree in the background is the
Fan-palm, represented in Cunningham, Plate xxx. 4. The trees to the
right and left are specimens of the Banyan-tree, the Nyagrodha, _Ficus
Indica_, the Bo-tree of the Buddha Kassapa. Note the down-growing
roots. See Cunningham, Plates xv. 3, xxvi. 6, xxx. 1 and 2.

The illustration to Story 11, _The anger-eating ogre_, represents
the ogre seated on the Yellowstone throne of Sakka (Indra), king of
the gods, in the heaven of the Thirty-three gods, thereby arousing
the indignation and anger of the gods, of whom two are shown in the
drawing. The tree in the background is probably the Sāl-tree. See note
on illustration to Story 3.

The illustration to Story 14, _King and boar_, represents the boar
flying through the air by the magical power of the gem which he has
just bitten. The power of flying through the air is mentioned in the
oldest texts as one of the several varieties of magical power which may
be acquired by the Practice of Meditation.

The illustration to Story 15, _A Buddhist Henny-Penny_, shows the
Future Buddha, in the form of a lion, setting out with the little hare
on his back to discover the cause of the flight of the animals. The
artist has introduced representatives of the various animals mentioned
in the story, and a few monkeys for good measure. Trees.--Left:
Magnolia. See Cunningham, Plate xxv. 1 (above archer). Centre:
Jack-tree. See Cunningham, Plate xiv. 1 (extreme left), xli. 4, xlii.
8, and xliii. 1. Top: Udumbara-tree, _Ficus Glomerata_, the Bo-tree of
the Buddha Kanakamuni. See Cunningham, Plate xxix. 4. Right middle:
Sirīsa-tree, _Acacia Sirisa_, more properly, _Albizzia Lebbek_, the
Bo-tree of the Buddha Kakusandha. See Cunningham, Plate xiv. 3. In the
illustration to Story 7, the tree is represented in flower. Compare
Cunningham, Plate xxix. 3. Lower right: Rose-apple, Jambu-tree. See
Cunningham, Plate xliv. 8. India is frequently called the Land of the
Rose-apple.

The illustration to Story 17, _Dragon Jewel-neck_, represents the king
of the dragons encircling the ascetic with his coils. The ascetic is
seated at the door of his leaf-hut on the bank of the Ganges. The
tree in the background is the Sacred Fig-tree, the Pipphala, _Ficus
Religiosa_. It was under a tree of this species that Gotama sat on the
night of his Enlightenment. Accordingly, this tree has a symbolic value
for Buddhists corresponding to that which the Cross has for Christians,
and is frequently sculptured on the monuments. See Cunningham,
Plates xiii. 1, xxx. 3. The tree to the right of the hut may be a
Sandalwood-tree. See note on illustration to Story 3.

The illustration to Story 22, _Monkey-gardeners_, is taken from
Cunningham, Plate xlv. 5. The monkeys, in obedience to the instructions
of their leader, are pulling up the young fig-trees by the roots,
examining the roots, watering plentifully the trees with long roots,
but sparingly the trees with short roots, and planting them again. In
drawing the water-pots, the artist has followed the Bharahat sculpture
rather than the description given in the text.




_1. The Grateful Elephant._

_Where there’s a will, there’s a way._

Jātaka 156: ii. 17-23.


  _Relying on Noble-heart._ This parable was related by the Teacher
  while he was in residence at Jetavana with reference to a certain monk
  who relaxed effort. Said the Teacher to him: “Of a truth, monk, did
  you not, in a previous state of existence, by exerting yourself, get
  and give to a young prince no bigger than a piece of meat, dominion
  over the city of Benāres, a city twelve leagues in measure?” So
  saying, he related the following Story of the Past:

In times past, when Brahmadatta ruled at Benāres, there was a
carpenters’ settlement not far from Benāres. In this settlement lived
five hundred carpenters. They would go up-stream in a boat, cut timber
for building materials for houses in the forest, and prepare houses
of one or more stories on the spot. Then, marking all of the timbers,
beginning with the pillars, they would carry them to the river-bank,
load them on a boat, return to the city with the current, and for a
price build for any particular person any particular kind of house he
desired to have built. Then they would go back to the forest and get
building materials once more. Thus they made their living.

One day, not far from the camp where they were fashioning timbers, a
certain elephant trod on an acacia splinter, and the splinter pierced
his foot. He suffered intense pain, and his foot became swollen and
festered. Maddened with pain, hearing the sound of those carpenters
fashioning timbers, thinking to himself, “With the help of these
carpenters I can get relief,” he went to them on three feet and lay
down not far off. The carpenters saw that his foot was swollen, and
on drawing closer, saw the splinter in his foot. So making incisions
all round the splinter with a sharp knife, they tied a cord to the
splinter, removed the splinter with a pull, let out the pus, washed the
wound with hot water, and by applying proper remedies, in no very long
time made the wound comfortable.

When the elephant was well, he thought: “I owe my life to these
carpenters; now I ought to do something for them.” From that time on
he helped the carpenters remove trees, rolled them over and held them
for the carpenters while they were fashioning them, brought them their
tools, and held the measuring-cord, taking it by the end and wrapping
his trunk about it. As for the carpenters, when it was time to eat,
each one of them gave the elephant a morsel of food; thus in all they
gave him five hundred morsels of food.

Now that elephant had a son, and he was pure white, a noble son of
a noble sire. So the following thought occurred to the elephant: “I
am now old. I ought therefore to give my son to these carpenters to
help them in their work, and myself go away.” Without saying a word
to the carpenters, he entered the forest, and leading his son to the
carpenters, said: “This young elephant is my son. You gave me my life;
I give you this elephant by way of paying the fee which I owe to my
physicians. Henceforth he will work for you.”

Then he admonished his son: “Henceforth you are to do whatever it was
my duty to do.” Having so said, he gave his son to the carpenters and
himself entered the forest. From that time on the young elephant obeyed
the commands of the carpenters, was patient of admonition, performed
all of the duties. They fed him also with five hundred morsels of food.
After doing his work, he would descend into the river and play, and
then come back. And the carpenters’ children used to take hold of him
by the trunk and play with him, both in the water and on dry land.

The elephant-trainers reported that incident to the king, remarking:
“That noble elephant should be sought out and brought to you, your
majesty.” The king made haste up the river with boats and rafts; with
rafts bound up-stream he reached the place of abode of the carpenters.
The young elephant, playing in the river, on hearing the sound of the
drum, went and stood by the carpenters. The carpenters went forth to
meet the king, and said: “Your majesty, if you have need of timber, why
did you yourself come? why shouldn’t you have sent men to get it?” “I
didn’t come for timber, I assure you, but I came for this elephant.”
“Take him and go, your majesty.”

The young elephant would not go. “What, pray, will you have done,
elephant?” “Have the carpenters paid for my keeping, your majesty.”
“Very well, I will,” said the king. He had a hundred thousand pieces
of money laid near each of the elephant’s four feet, near his trunk,
and near his tail. But for all that the elephant would not go. When,
however, pairs of cloths had been given to all of the carpenters, when
under-garments had been given to the carpenters’ wives, and when the
proper attentions had been paid to the children he had played with,
then the elephant turned around, and eyeing the carpenters and their
wives and their children as he went, accompanied the king.

The king took the elephant, went to the city, and caused both city
and elephant-stable to be adorned. He caused the elephant to make
rightwise circuit of the city and to be taken into the elephant-stable.
He adorned the elephant with all the adornments, sprinkled him, made
him his riding-animal, elevated him to the dignity of a friend, gave
him half his kingdom, and had him treated as himself. From the day when
the elephant arrived, the king obtained complete mastery over all the
Land of the Rose-apple.

As time thus went on, the Future Buddha received a new existence as the
child of the chief consort of that king. But before the child was born,
the king died. Now if the elephant had known that the king was dead,
it would have broken his heart then and there. So they said not a word
to the elephant about the king’s death, but waited on him just as if
nothing had happened.

But when the king of Kosala, who ruled over the country immediately
adjoining, heard that the king was dead, he reflected: “The kingdom,
they say, is empty;” and came with a large army and surrounded the
city. The citizens closed the gates of the city and sent the following
message to the king of Kosala: “The chief consort of our king is about
to give birth to a child. The soothsayers have told us: ‘Seven days
hence she will give birth to a son.’ If, on the seventh day, she gives
birth to a son, we will give battle,--not the kingdom. Wait that long.”
“Very well,” said the king in assent. On the seventh day the queen gave
birth to a son. On the day when he received his name, because, as they
said, “He is born extending a noble heart to the multitude,” they gave
him the name Noble-heart, Alīnacitta.

Now from the day he was born, the citizens fought with the king of
Kosala. But because they had no man to lead them in battle, the force,
large as it was, gave way little by little in the conflict. Ministers
reported this fact to the queen, saying: “We fear that if the force
continues thus to give way, we shall lose the battle. But the state
elephant, the king’s friend, does not know that the king is dead,
that his son is born, and that the king of Kosala has come to fight.”
And they asked her: “Shall we let him know?” “Yes,” said the queen,
assenting. She adorned the boy, laid him in a head-coil of fine cloth,
came down from the terrace, and accompanied by a retinue of ministers,
went to the elephant-stable, and laid the Future Buddha at the feet of
the elephant. Said she: “Master, your friend is dead. We didn’t tell
you because we were afraid it would break your heart. Here is the son
of your friend. The king of Kosala has come and has surrounded the city
and is fighting with your son. The force is giving way. Do you either
kill your son or get and give him the kingdom.”

Then the elephant with his trunk caressed the Future Buddha and lifted
him up and put him on his shoulders and cried and wept. Then he
lowered the Future Buddha and laid him in the arms of the queen, and
with the words, “I will capture the king of Kosala!” went out of the
elephant-stable. Then the ministers clad him with armor and adorned
him, and unlocking the city-gate, went out in his train.

As the elephant went out of the city, he trumpeted the Heron’s Call,
making the multitude tremble and quake, and frightening them away. He
broke down the stockade, seized the king of Kosala by the top-knot,
and carried him and laid him at the Future Buddha’s feet. And when men
rose to kill him, he would not let them, but set the king free with the
admonition: “Henceforth be careful; do not presume on the youth of the
prince.”

Thenceforth the Future Buddha had complete mastery over all the Land
of the Rose-apple. No other adversary dared to stand up against
him. When the Future Buddha was seven years old, he received the
ceremonial sprinkling and became known as King Noble-heart. He ruled
with righteousness, and when his life was come to an end, departed,
fulfilling the Path to Heaven.

  When the Teacher had related this parable, he uttered, as Supreme
  Buddha, the following stanza:

    Relying on Noble-heart, a mighty host, delighted,
    Captured Kosala alive, dissatisfied with his army.




_2. Grateful Animals and Ungrateful Man._

_Driftwood is worth more than some men._

Jātaka 78: i. 322-327.


  _True is this saying of some men of the world._ This parable was
  related by the Teacher while he was in residence at Bamboo Grove with
  reference to Devadatta’s going about for the purpose of killing him.
  For while the Congregation of Monks, sitting in the Hall of Truth,
  were discussing Devadatta’s wickedness, saying, “Brethren, Devadatta
  knows not the Teacher’s virtues, but is going about for the sole
  purpose of killing him,” the Teacher drew near and asked: “Monks,
  what is the subject that engages your attention now as you sit here
  all gathered together?” “Such-and-such,” was the reply. “Monks,”
  said the Teacher, “not only in his present state of existence has
  Devadatta gone about for the purpose of killing me; in a previous
  state of existence also he went about for the purpose of killing me
  in the very same way.” Then, in response to a request of the monks,
  he related the following Story of the Past:


_Prince Wicked._

In times past Brahmadatta ruled at Benāres. He had a son named Prince
Wicked, and Prince Wicked was as tough and hard as a beaten snake. He
never spoke to anybody without either reviling him or striking him.
The result was that both by indoor-folk and by outdoor-folk he was
disliked and detested as much as dust lodged in the eye or as a demon
come to eat.

One day, desiring to sport in the water, he went to the river-bank with
a large retinue. At that moment a great cloud arose. The directions
became dark. He said to his slaves and servants: “Come, fellows! take
me and conduct me to mid-stream and bathe me and bring me back.” They
led him there and took counsel together, saying: “What can the king
do to us! Let’s kill this wicked fellow right here!” So saying, they
plunged him into the water, made their way out of the water again, and
stood on the bank.

As the courtiers returned to the king, they reflected: “In case we
are asked, ‘Where is the prince?’ we will say, ‘We have not seen the
prince; it must be that upon seeing a cloud arise he plunged into the
water and went on ahead of us.’” The king asked: “Where is my son?” “We
do not know, your majesty. A cloud arose. We returned, supposing: ‘He
must have gone on ahead of us.’” The king caused the gates to be flung
open, went to the river-bank, and caused them to search here and there.
“Search!” said he. Nobody saw the prince.

As a matter of fact, in the darkness caused by the cloud, while the god
was raining, the prince, swept along by the river, seeing a certain
tree-trunk, clambered on it, and sitting astride of it, traveled along,
terrified with the fear of death, lamenting.


_Snake, rat, parrot, and man._

Now at that time a resident of Benāres, a certain treasurer, who had
buried forty crores of wealth by the river-bank, by reason of his
craving for that wealth, had been reborn on top of that wealth as a
snake. Yet another had buried thirty crores of wealth in that very
spot, and by reason of his craving for that wealth, had been reborn on
the spot as a rat. The water entered their place of abode. They went
out by the very path by which the water came in, cleft the stream, and
went until they reached the tree-trunk bestridden by the royal prince.
Thereupon one climbed up on one end, the other on the other, and both
lay down right there on top of the tree-trunk.

Moreover, on the bank of that very river there was a certain
silk-cotton tree, and in it lived a certain young parrot. That tree
also, its roots washed by the water, fell on top of the river. The
young parrot, unable to make headway by flying while the god was
raining, went and perched on one side of that very tree-trunk. Thus did
those four persons travel together, swept along by the river.


_The Future Buddha befriends animals and man._

Now at that time the Future Buddha was reborn in the kingdom of Kāsi in
the household of a Brahman of high station. When he reached manhood,
he retired from the world and adopted the life of an ascetic, and
building a leaf-hut at a certain bend in the river, took up his abode
there. At midnight, as he was walking up and down, he heard the sound
of the profound lamentation of that royal prince. Thought he: “It is
not fitting that that man should die in sight of an ascetic like me,
endowed with friendliness and compassion. I will pull him out of the
water and grant him the boon of life.” He calmed the man’s fears with
the words, “Fear not! fear not!” Then, cleaving the stream of water,
he went and laid hold of that tree-trunk by one end, and pulled it.
Powerful as an elephant, endowed with mighty strength, with a single
pull he reached the bank, and lifting the prince in his arms, set him
ashore.

[Illustration: _Thus did those four persons travel together, swept
along by the river._]

Seeing the snake, the rat, and the parrot, he picked them up also,
carried them to his hermitage, and lighted a fire. “The animals are
weaker,” thought he. So first he warmed the bodies of the animals;
then afterwards he warmed the body of the royal prince and made him
well too. When he brought food also, he first gave it to those same
animals, and afterwards offered fruits and other edibles to the prince.
Thought the royal prince: “This false ascetic does not take it into his
reckoning that I am a royal prince, but does honor to animals.” And he
conceived a grudge against the Future Buddha.

A few days after that, when all four had recovered their strength and
vigor and the river-freshet had ceased, the snake bowed to the ascetic
and said: “Reverend Sir, it is a great service you have done me. Now
I am no pauper. In such-and-such a place I have buried forty crores
of gold. If you have need of money, I can give you all that money.
Come to that place and call me out, saying: ‘Longfellow!’” So saying,
he departed. Likewise also the rat addressed the ascetic: “Stand in
such-and-such a place and call me out, saying: ‘Rat!’” So saying, he
departed.

But when the parrot bowed to the ascetic, he said: “Reverend Sir, I
have no money; but if you have need of ruddy rice,--such-and-such is my
place of abode,--go there and call me out, saying: ‘Parrot!’ I’ll tell
my kinsfolk, have them fetch ruddy rice by the cart-load, and give it
to you. That’s what I can do!” So saying, he departed.

But that other, the man, because it was his custom to betray his
friends, said not so much as a word according to custom. Thought he:
“If you come to me, I’ll kill you!” But he said: “Reverend Sir, when I
am established in my kingdom, be good enough to come and see me; I’ll
furnish you with the Four Requisites.” So saying, he departed. And in
no very long time after he had gone, he was established in his kingdom.


_Gratefulness of animals._

Thought the Future Buddha: “I’ll just put them to the test!” First he
went to the snake, and standing not far off, called him out, saying,
“Longfellow!” At the mere word the snake came out, bowed to the Future
Buddha, and said: “Reverend Sir, in this place are forty crores of
gold; carry them all out and take them with you!” Said the Future
Buddha: “Let be as it is; if occasion arises, I’ll think about it.” So
saying, he let the snake go back.

Then he went to the rat and made a noise. The rat also behaved just as
had the snake. The Future Buddha let him also go back. Then he went
to the parrot and called him out, saying: “Parrot!” The parrot also,
at the mere word, came down from the top of the tree, and bowing to
the Future Buddha, asked: “Tell me, Reverend Sir, shall I speak to my
kinsfolk and have them fetch you self-sown rice from the region of
Himavat?” Said the Future Buddha: “If I have need, I’ll think about
it.” So saying, he let the parrot also go back.


_Ungratefulness of man._

“Now,” thought the Future Buddha, “I’ll test the king!” He went and
passed the night in the king’s garden, and on the following day, having
put on beautiful garments, entered the city on his round for alms. At
that moment that king, that betrayer of friends, seated on the back of
his gloriously adorned state elephant, accompanied by a large retinue,
was making a rightwise circuit of the city. Seeing the Future Buddha
even from afar, he thought: “Here’s that false ascetic, come to live
with me and eat his fill! That he may not make known in the midst of
this company the service he has rendered me, I’ll straightway have his
head cut off!”

He looked at his men. Said they: “What shall we do, your majesty?” Said
the king: “Here’s a false ascetic, come to ask me for something or
other, I suppose. Without so much as giving that false ascetic, that
bird of evil omen, a chance to look at me, take that fellow, bind his
arms behind his back, conduct him out of the city, beating him at every
cross-roads, cut off his head in the place of execution, and impale
his body on a stake!” “Very well,” said the king’s men in assent. They
bound the Great Being, guiltless as he was, and started to conduct him
to the place of execution, beating him at every cross-roads. The Future
Buddha, wherever they beat him, uttered no lament, “Women! men!” but
unperturbed, uttered the following stanza:

  True is this saying of some men of the world:
  “Driftwood is worth more than some men!”

  [_Native gloss_: A stick of wood washed up on dry land is of some
  use: it will cook food; it will warm those who are shivering with the
  cold; it will remove dangerous objects. But an ingrate is worse than
  useless.]

Thus, wherever they beat him, did he utter this stanza. Hearing this,
wise men who stood by said: “But, monk, what is the trouble between you
and our king? have you done him some good turn?” Then the Future Buddha
told them the whole story, saying: “I alone, by pulling this man out
of a mighty flood, have brought suffering upon myself. I speak as I do
because I keep thinking: ‘Alas! I have not heeded the words of wise men
of old!’”

Hearing this, Warriors and Brahmans and others, residents of the city,
became enraged. Said they: “This king here, this betrayer of friends,
has not the slightest conception of the virtues of this embodiment of
the virtues, this man who has granted him the boon of his own life!
What have we to gain through him! Capture him!” And rising in all
quarters, they slew him, even as he sat on the back of the elephant,
by hitting him with arrows and spears and rocks and clubs. And laying
hold of his feet, they dragged him and threw him back of the moat.
And conferring the ceremonial sprinkling on the Future Buddha, they
established him in the kingdom. The Future Buddha ruled righteously.

Again one day, desiring to test the snake, the rat, and the parrot,
he went with a large retinue to the place of abode of the snake and
called him out, saying: “Longfellow!” The snake came, bowed to him,
and said: “Here’s your money, master; take it.” The king entrusted to
his ministers wealth amounting to forty crores of gold. Then he went
to the rat and called him out, saying: “Rat!” The rat also came, and
with a bow handed over to him wealth amounting to thirty crores. The
king entrusted that also to his ministers. Then he went to the place of
abode of the parrot and called him out, saying: “Parrot!” The parrot
also came, and reverencing his feet, said: “Master, shall I fetch
rice?” Said the king: “When there is need of rice, you may fetch it;
come, let’s go.”

With the seventy crores of gold, causing those three animals also
to be carried along, he went to the city. And ascending to the grand
floor of his magnificent palace, he caused that wealth to be stored and
guarded. For the snake to live in, he caused a golden tube to be made;
for the rat, a crystal cave; for the parrot, a golden cage. For the
snake and the parrot to eat, he caused every day sweet parched grain to
be given in a vessel of gold purified with fire; for the rat, grains
of perfumed rice; he gave alms and performed the other works of merit.
Thus those four persons, one and all, dwelt together in unity and
concord all their days, and when their days were come to an end, passed
away according to their deeds.

  Said the Teacher: “Monks, not only in his present state of existence
  has Devadatta gone about for the purpose of killing me; in a previous
  state of existence also he went about for the purpose of killing me
  in the very same way.”




_3. Elephant and Ungrateful Forester._

_The whole earth will not satisfy an ungrateful man._

Jātaka 72: i. 319-322.


  _To an ungrateful man._ This parable was related by the Teacher while
  he was in residence at Bamboo Grove with reference to Devadatta.
  The monks, seated in the Hall of Truth, were saying: “Brethren,
  Devadatta the ungrateful knows not the virtues of the Teacher.”
  The Teacher drew near and asked: “Monks, what is the subject that
  engages your attention now, as you sit here all gathered together?”
  “Such-and-such,” was the reply. “Monks,” said the Teacher, “not
  only in his present state of existence has Devadatta proved to be
  ungrateful; in a previous state of existence also he was ungrateful
  just the same. At no time soever has he known my virtues.” Then, in
  response to a request of the monks, he related the following Story of
  the Past:

In times past, when Brahmadatta ruled at Benāres, the Future Buddha
was reborn in the region of Himavat as an elephant. When he was born,
he was pure white, like a mass of silver; moreover his eyes were like
globules of jewels, and from them shone forth the Five Brightnesses;
his mouth was like a crimson blanket; his trunk was like a rope of
silver, ornamented with spots of ruddy gold; his four feet were as if
rubbed with lac. Thus his person, adorned with the Ten Perfections,
attained the pinnacle of beauty.

Now when he reached the age of reason, elephants from all over Himavat
assembled and formed his retinue. Thus did he make his home in the
region of Himavat, with a retinue of eighty thousand elephants. After a
time, perceiving that there was contamination in the herd, he isolated
himself from the herd and made his home quite alone in the forest.
Moreover, by reason of his goodness, he became known as Good King
Elephant.

Now a certain resident of Benāres, a forester, entered the forest,
seeking wares whereby to make his living. Unable to distinguish the
directions, he lost his way, and terrified with the fear of death, went
about with outstretched arms lamenting. The Future Buddha, hearing
those profound lamentations of his, thought: “I will free this man from
his suffering.” And impelled by compassion, he went to him.

The instant that man saw the Future Buddha, he fled in fright. The
Future Buddha, seeing him in flight, halted right where he was. The
man, seeing that the Future Buddha had halted, himself halted. The
Future Buddha came back. The man fled a second time, but halting when
the Future Buddha halted, thought: “This elephant halts when I flee,
and approaches when I halt. He has no desire to do me harm, but without
a doubt desires only to free me from this suffering.” And summoning up
his courage, he halted.

The Future Buddha approached him and asked: “Why, Master man, do you
go about lamenting?” “Master, because I couldn’t distinguish the
directions, lost my way, and was afraid of death.” Then the Future
Buddha conducted him to his own place of abode, and for a few days
gladdened him with fruits and other edibles. Then said the Future
Buddha: “Master man, don’t be afraid: I’ll conduct you to the path of
man.” And seating him on his back, he proceeded to the path of men.

But that man, that betrayer of friends, even as he sat on the back of
the Future Buddha, thought: “If anybody asks me, I must be able to tell
him where this elephant lives.” So as he went along, he noted carefully
the landmarks of tree and mountain. Now the Future Buddha, having
conducted that man out of the forest, set him down on the highway
leading to Benāres, and said to him: “Master man, go by this road; but
as for my place of abode, whether you are asked or not, say nothing to
anybody about it.” So saying, he took leave of him and went back to his
own place of abode.

Now that man went to Benāres, and in the course of his walks came to
the street of the ivory-carvers. And seeing the ivory-carvers making
various kinds of ivory products, he asked: “But, sirs, how much would
you make if you could get the tusk of a real live elephant?” “What are
you saying, sir! The tusk of a live elephant is far more valuable than
the tusk of a dead elephant.” “Very well! I’ll fetch you the tusk of a
live elephant.” Accordingly, obtaining provisions for the journey and
taking a sharp saw, he went to the place of abode of the Future Buddha.

When the Future Buddha saw him, he asked: “For what purpose have you
come?” “I, sir, am a poor man, a pauper, unable to make a living. I
came with this thought in my mind: ‘I will ask you for a fragment of
one of your tusks; if you will give it to me, I will take it and go and
sell it and with the money it brings make a living.’” “Let be, sir!
I’ll give you tusks, if you have a sharp saw to cut them off with.” “I
brought a saw with me, sir.” “Very well, sever the tusks with your saw
and take them and go your way.” So saying, the Future Buddha bowed his
knees together and sat down like a cow. The man actually cut off his
two principal tusks!

[Illustration: _The man actually cut off his two principal tusks!_]

The Future Buddha, taking those tusks in his trunk, said: “Master
man, not with the thought, ‘These tusks are not dear to me, not
pleasing to me,’ do I give you these tusks. But dearer to me than
these a thousand times,--a hundred thousand times,--are the Tusks of
Omniscience, which avail to the comprehension of all things. May this
gift of tusks which I here bestow enable me to attain Omniscience!” So
saying, as it were sowing the Seed of Omniscience, he gave him the pair
of tusks.

The man took them and went and sold them. When the money they brought
was gone, he went to the Future Buddha again and said: “Master, the
money I got by selling you tusks turned out to be no more than enough
to pay off my debts. Give me the rest of your tusks!” “Very well,” said
the Future Buddha, consenting. And ordering all things precisely as
before, he gave him the rest of his tusks.

Those also did that man sell, and then came back again. “Master,” said
he. “I cannot make a living. Give me the stumps of your tusks!” “Very
well,” said the Future Buddha, and sat down precisely as before. That
wicked man trod on the Great Being’s trunk,--that trunk which was like
unto a rope of silver; climbed up on the Great Being’s temples,--those
temples which were like unto the snow-clad peaks of Kelāsa, with his
heel kicking the tips of the tusks and loosening the flesh; and having
mounted the temples, with a sharp saw severed the stumps of the tusks,
and went his way.

But even as that wicked man receded from the vision of the Future
Buddha, the solid earth, which extends for a distance of two hundred
thousand leagues and four Inconceivables more, which is able to
endure such mighty burdens as Sineru and Yugandhara, and all manner
of foul-smelling and repulsive objects,--even the solid earth, as if
unable to endure the wickedness he had piled upon it, burst asunder
and yawned. Instantly from the Great Waveless Hell flames of fire shot
forth, enveloped that man, that betrayer of friends, wrapping him, as
it were, in a blanket proper for death and laid hold of him.

When that wicked man thus entered the earth, the tree-spirit resident
in that forest-grove thought: “An ungrateful man, a man who will betray
his friends, cannot be satisfied, even if he be given the kingdom of a
Universal Monarch.” And making the forest ring, proclaiming the Truth,
the tree-spirit uttered the following stanza:

  To an ungrateful man
  Ever looking for an opening
  You may give the whole earth
  And yet not satisfy him.

Thus did that tree-spirit, making the forest ring, proclaim the Truth.
The Future Buddha, having remained on earth during the term of life
allotted to him, passed away according to his deeds.

  Said the Teacher: “Monks, not only in his present state of existence
  has Devadatta proved ungrateful; in a previous state of existence
  also he was ungrateful just the same.” Having completed the parable,
  he identified the personages in the Birth-story as follows: “At that
  time the man who betrayed his friend was Devadatta, the tree-spirit
  was one of my disciples, but Good King Elephant was I myself.”




_4. Quail, Crow, Fly, Frog, and Elephants._

_The biter bit._

Jātaka 357: iii. 174-177.


  Hearing that the monks of Kosambi were quarreling, the Exalted One
  went to them and said: “Enough, monks! No quarreling! No brawling! No
  contending! No wrangling!” Then he said: “Monks, quarrels, brawls,
  contentions, wrangles,--all these are unprofitable. For because of a
  quarrel even a tiny quail brought about the destruction of a noble
  elephant.”

In times past, when Brahmadatta ruled at Benāres, the Future Buddha was
reborn as an elephant. He grew up to be a fine big animal, acquired
a retinue of eighty thousand elephants, and becoming the leader of a
herd, made his home in the Himālaya region. At that time a tiny female
quail laid her eggs in the elephants’ stamping-ground. When the eggs
were hatched, the fledglings broke the shells and came out. Before
their wings had grown and while they were yet unable to fly, the Great
Being came to that spot with his retinue of eighty thousand elephants
in search of food.

When the tiny quail saw him, she thought: “This elephant-king will
crush my fledglings and kill them. Well, I will ask of him righteous
protection for the defense of my little ones.” So folding her wings
and standing before him, she uttered the first stanza:

  I salute you, elephant of sixty years,
  Forest-ranger, glorious leader of a herd;
  With my wings I do you homage.
  I am weak: do not kill my little ones.

Said the Great Being: “Do not worry, tiny quail; I will protect your
little ones.” And he stood over the fledglings, and the eighty thousand
elephants passed by. Then he addressed the tiny quail: “Behind us comes
a single solitary elephant; he will not obey our command. If you ask
him also when he comes, you may obtain safety for your little ones.” So
saying, he went his way.

The tiny quail went forth to meet the solitary elephant, did homage to
him with her wings, and uttered the second stanza:

  I salute you, solitary elephant,
  Forest-ranger, pasturing on mountain and on hill;
  With my wings I do you homage.
  I am weak: do not kill my little ones.

The solitary elephant, hearing her words, uttered the third stanza:

  I will kill your little ones, tiny quail.
  What can you do to me? You are a weakling.
  Even a hundred thousand like you
  Could I crush with my left foot.

So saying, he pulverized her little ones with his foot, and went his
way trumpeting. The tiny quail perched on the branch of a tree and
thought: “Just now you go your way trumpeting. In only a few days you
will see what I can do! You do not understand that the mind is stronger
than the body. Ah, but I will make you understand!” And threatening
him, she uttered the fourth stanza:

  For not alway does strength avail;
  For strength is the destruction of a fool.
  Elephant-king, I will do you harm,
  You who killed my little ones since I was weak.

Thus spoke the tiny quail. For a few days she ministered to a crow.
The crow was pleased and said: “What can I do for you?” Said the tiny
quail: “Master, there is only one thing I want done. I expect you to
peck out the eyes of that solitary elephant.” “Very well,” assented
the crow. The tiny quail then ministered to a green fly. The fly also
said, “What can I do for you?” Said the tiny quail: “When this crow
has put out the eyes of the solitary elephant, I wish you would drop a
nit on them.” “Very well,” assented the fly also. The tiny quail then
ministered to a frog. Said the frog: “What can I do?” Said the tiny
quail: “When this solitary elephant has gone blind and seeks water to
drink, then please squat on the mountain-top and croak; and when he
has climbed to the top of the mountain, then please hop down and croak
at the bottom. This is all I expect of you.” The frog also, hearing her
words, assented, saying, “Very well.”

Now one day the crow pecked out both of the elephant’s eyes, and the
fly let a nit drop on them. The elephant, eaten up by maggots, maddened
with pain, overcome with thirst, wandered about seeking water to drink.
At that moment the frog, squatting on the mountain-top, let out a
croak. The elephant thought: “There must be water there;” and climbed
the mountain. Then the frog hopped down, and squatting at the bottom,
let out a croak. The elephant thought: “There must be water there.” And
going to the brink of the precipice, he tumbled and fell to the foot of
the mountain, and met destruction.

When the tiny quail realized that he was dead, she cried out: “I have
seen the back of my enemy!” And pleased and delighted, she strutted
over his shoulders, and passed away according to her deeds.

  Behold the quail, the crow, the fly, the frog!
  They slew the elephant! Behold the hatred of the haters!




_5. Quails and Fowler._

_In union there is strength._

Jātaka 33: i. 208-210.


  Then said the Exalted One to those monks: “Monks, be united; do not
  wrangle. For because of a wrangle many thousand quails lost their
  lives.”

In times past, when Brahmadatta ruled at Benāres, the Future Buddha
was reborn as a quail, and lived in the forest with a retinue of many
thousand quails. At that time a certain quail-hunter used to go to the
haunt of the quails and attract them by imitating a quail’s whistle.
When he perceived that they had assembled, he would throw a net over
them and huddle them all together by trampling the edges. Then he would
fill his basket, go home, and sell them. Thus he made his living.

Now one day the Future Buddha said to those quails: “This fowler is
bringing our kinsfolk to destruction. I know a way by which he shall
not be able to catch us. From this time on, the moment he throws the
net over you, let each quail stick his head through a single mesh,
lift the net, and carrying it wherever you will, let it down on some
thorn-brake. This done, we can escape each through his own mesh.” They
all assented, saying, “Very well!”

When the net was thrown over them on the following day, they raised the
net precisely as the Future Buddha had told them to, dropped it on a
certain thorn-brake, and themselves escaped from under. Twilight came
on with the fowler still busy disentangling the net from the brake, and
he went away absolutely empty-handed. On the next day, and thereafter
also, the quails did the very same thing. The fowler also, busy every
moment until sunset disentangling the net, got nothing, and went home
absolutely empty-handed.

Now his wife got angry and said: “Day after day you return
empty-handed; I suppose there is some other household outside you have
to provide for too.” Said the fowler: “My dear, there is no other
household I have to provide for. The fact is, these quails are acting
in unison. The moment I throw the net, they depart with it and drop
it on a thorn-brake. But they will not live in unity forever. Do not
worry. When they fall to wrangling, I will return with them all and
bring a smile to your lips.” And he recited the following stanza to his
wife:

  United, the birds go away with the net;
  But when they fall out, they’ll come into my power.

Now after only a few days had passed, one quail, lighting on the
feeding-ground, accidentally trod on the head of another. The other was
offended and said: “Who trod on my head?” “I did, but accidentally;
do not be offended.” But the other was offended just the same. They
bandied words and wrangled with each other, saying, “You alone, I
suppose, lift the net!”

While they wrangled, the Future Buddha thought: “There is no safety for
a wrangler. From this moment they will not lift the net. Then they will
come to a sorry end. The fowler will get his chance. It is impossible
for me to live in this place.” And he went elsewhere with his own
retinue.

As for the fowler, he came back after a few days, imitated a quail’s
whistle, and when the quails had assembled, threw the net over them.
Then said one quail: “They say that in the very act of lifting the net,
you lost the down on your head. Now lift!” Said another: “They say that
in the very act of lifting the net, you lost your wing-feathers. Now
lift!”

Even as they said: “You lift!” “You lift!” the fowler tossed the net.
And huddling them all together, he filled his basket, and went home and
brought a smile to the lips of his wife.

  And for the second time the Exalted One said this to those monks:
  “Enough, monks! No quarreling! No brawling! No contending! No
  wrangling!”

  But in spite of this, they paid no attention to his words. Thereupon
  the Exalted One related the following Story of the Past:




_6. Brahmadatta and the Prince._

_Love your enemies._

Vinaya i. 342-349.


In olden times at Benāres, Brahmadatta king of Kāsi was rich,
possessed of great wealth, ample means of enjoyment, a mighty army,
many vehicles, an extensive kingdom, and well filled treasuries and
storehouses. Dīghīti king of Kosala was poor, possessed of meagre
wealth, scanty means of enjoyment, a small army, few vehicles, a little
kingdom, and unfilled treasuries and storehouses.

Now Brahmadatta king of Kāsi drew up his fourfold army and went up
against Dīghīti king of Kosala. And Dīghīti king of Kosala heard:
“Brahmadatta king of Kāsi, they say, has drawn up his fourfold army,
and is come up against me.” Then to Dīghīti king of Kosala occurred
the following thought: “Brahmadatta king of Kāsi is rich, possessed of
great wealth, ample means of enjoyment, a mighty army, many vehicles,
an extensive kingdom, and well filled treasuries and storehouses. But
I am poor, possessed of meagre wealth, scanty means of enjoyment, a
small army, few vehicles, a little kingdom, and unfilled treasuries and
storehouses. I am not strong enough to withstand even a single clash
with Brahmadatta king of Kāsi. Suppose I were merely to countermarch
and slip out of the city!”

Accordingly Dīghīti king of Kosala took his consort, merely
countermarched, and slipped out of the city. Thereupon Brahmadatta king
of Kāsi conquered the army and vehicles and territory and treasuries
and storehouses of Dīghīti king of Kosala, and took possession. And
Dīghīti king of Kosala with his consort set out for Benāres, and in
due course arrived at Benāres. And there, in a certain place on the
outskirts of Benāres, Dīghīti king of Kosala resided with his consort,
in a potter’s dwelling, in disguise, in the guise of a wandering
ascetic.

Now in no very long time the consort of Dīghīti king of Kosala was
with child. And this was her craving: She desired at sunrise to see a
fourfold army drawn up, clad in armor, standing in a pleasant place,
and to drink the rinsings of swords. Accordingly the consort of Dīghīti
king of Kosala said this to Dīghīti king of Kosala: “I am with child,
O king. And this craving has arisen within me: I desire at sunrise to
see a fourfold army drawn up, clad in armor, standing in a pleasant
place, and to drink the rinsings of swords.” “Whence are we, wretched
folk, to obtain a fourfold army drawn up, clad in armor, standing in
a pleasant place, and the rinsings of swords?” “If, O king, I do not
obtain my desire, I shall die.”

Now at that time the Brahman who was the house-priest of Brahmadatta
king of Kāsi was a friend of Dīghīti king of Kosala. Accordingly
Dīghīti king of Kosala approached the Brahman who was the house-priest
of Brahmadatta king of Kāsi. And having approached, he said this to the
Brahman who was the house-priest of Brahmadatta king of Kāsi: “Sir,
your female friend is with child. And this craving has arisen within
her: She desires at sunrise to see a fourfold army drawn up, clad in
armor, standing in a pleasant place, and to drink the rinsings of
swords.” “Very well, O king, we also will see the queen.”

Now the consort of Dīghīti king of Kosala approached the Brahman who
was the house-priest of Brahmadatta king of Kāsi. The Brahman who was
the house-priest of Brahmadatta king of Kāsi saw the consort of Dīghīti
king of Kosala approaching even from afar. And seeing her, he rose from
his seat, adjusted his upper robe so as to cover one shoulder only,
and bending his joined hands in reverent salutation before the consort
of Dīghīti king of Kosala, thrice breathed forth the utterance: “All
hail! A king of Kosala shall be born of thee! All hail! A king of
Kosala shall be born of thee!” Then he said: “Be not distressed, O
queen. You shall obtain your desire to see at sunrise a fourfold army
drawn up, clad in armor, standing in a pleasant place, and to drink the
rinsings of swords.”

Thereupon the Brahman who was the house-priest of Brahmadatta king
of Kāsi approached Brahmadatta king of Kāsi. And having approached,
he said this to Brahmadatta king of Kāsi: “Thus, O king, the signs
appear: To-morrow at sunrise let the fourfold army be drawn up, clad
in armor, standing in a pleasant place, and let the swords be washed.”
Accordingly Brahmadatta king of Kāsi ordered his men: “Do as the
Brahman who is my house-priest has said.” Thus the consort of Dīghīti
king of Kosala obtained her desire to see at sunrise a fourfold army
drawn up, clad in armor, standing in a pleasant place, and to drink the
rinsings of swords. And when that unborn child had reached maturity,
the consort of Dīghīti king of Kosala brought forth a son, and they
called his name Dīghāvu. And in no very long time Prince Dīghāvu
reached the age of reason.

Now to Dīghīti king of Kosala occurred the following thought: “This
Brahmadatta king of Kāsi has done us much injury. He has robbed us of
army and vehicles and territory and treasuries and storehouses. If
he recognizes us, he will cause all three of us to be put to death.
Suppose I were to cause Prince Dīghāvu to dwell outside of the city!”
Accordingly Dīghīti king of Kosala caused Prince Dīghāvu to dwell
outside of the city. And Prince Dīghāvu, residing outside of the city,
in no very long time acquired all the arts and crafts.

Now at that time the barber of Dīghīti king of Kosala resided at the
court of Brahmadatta king of Kāsi. The barber of Dīghīti king of Kosala
saw Dīghīti king of Kosala residing with his consort in a certain place
on the outskirts of Benāres, in a potter’s dwelling, in disguise,
in the guise of a wandering ascetic. When he saw him, he approached
Brahmadatta king of Kāsi. And having approached, he said this to
Brahmadatta king of Kāsi: “O king, Dīghīti king of Kosala is residing
with his consort in a certain place on the outskirts of Benāres, in a
potter’s dwelling, in disguise, in the guise of a wandering ascetic.”

Thereupon Brahmadatta king of Kāsi ordered his men: “Now then, bring
Dīghīti king of Kosala with his consort before me.” “Yes, your
majesty,” said those men to Brahmadatta king of Kāsi; and in obedience
to his command brought Dīghīti king of Kosala with his consort before
him. Then Brahmadatta king of Kāsi ordered his men: “Now then, take
Dīghīti king of Kosala with his consort, bind their arms tight behind
their backs with a stout rope, shave their heads, and to the loud
beating of a drum lead them about from street to street, from crossing
to crossing, conduct them out of the South gate, hack their bodies
into four pieces south of the city, and throw the pieces in the four
directions.”

“Yes, your majesty,” said those men to Brahmadatta king of Kāsi; and in
obedience to his command took Dīghīti king of Kosala with his consort,
bound their arms tight behind their backs with a stout rope, shaved
their heads, and to the loud beating of a drum led them about from
street to street, from crossing to crossing.

Now to Prince Dīghāvu occurred the following thought: “It is a long
time since I have seen my mother and father. Suppose I were to see my
mother and father!” Accordingly Prince Dīghāvu entered Benāres, and
saw his mother and father, their arms bound tight behind their backs,
their heads shaven, being led about, to the loud beating of a drum,
from street to street, from crossing to crossing. When he saw this, he
approached his mother and father.

Dīghīti king of Kosala saw Prince Dīghāvu approaching even from afar.
When he saw him, he said this to Prince Dīghāvu: “Dear Dīghāvu, do
not look long! Do not look short! For, dear Dīghāvu, hatreds are not
quenched by hatred. Nay rather, dear Dīghāvu, hatreds are quenched by
love.”

At these words those men said this to Dīghīti king of Kosala: “This
Dīghīti king of Kosala is stark mad, and talks gibberish. Who is
Dīghāvu to him? To whom did he speak thus: ‘Dear Dīghāvu, do not look
long! Do not look short! For, dear Dīghāvu, hatreds are not quenched by
hatred. Nay rather, dear Dīghāvu, hatreds are quenched by love’?” “I am
not stark mad, I assure you, nor do I talk gibberish. However, he that
is intelligent will understand clearly.” For the second and the third
time Dīghīti king of Kosala spoke thus to Prince Dīghāvu, and those men
spoke thus to Dīghīti king of Kosala.

Then those men led Dīghīti king of Kosala with his consort about from
street to street, from crossing to crossing, conducted them out of the
South gate, hacked their bodies into four pieces south of the city,
threw the pieces in the four directions, posted a guard of soldiers,
and departed.

Thereupon Prince Dīghāvu entered Benāres, procured liquor, and gave
it to the soldiers to drink. When they were drunk and had fallen, he
gathered sticks of wood, built a pyre, placed the bodies of his mother
and father on the pyre, lighted it, and with joined hands upraised in
reverent salutation thrice made sunwise circuit of the pyre.

Now at that time Brahmadatta king of Kāsi was on an upper floor of his
splendid palace. And Brahmadatta king of Kāsi saw Prince Dīghāvu, with
joined hands upraised in reverent salutation, thrice making sunwise
circuit of the pyre. When he saw this, the following thought occurred
to him: “Without doubt that man is a kinsman or blood-relative of
Dīghīti king of Kosala. Alas, my wretched misfortune, for no one will
tell me the facts!”

Now Prince Dīghāvu went to the forest, wailed and wept his fill,
and wiped his tears away. Then he entered Benāres, went to the
elephant-stable adjoining the royal palace, and said this to the
elephant-trainer: “Trainer, I wish to learn your art.” “Very well,
young man, learn it.” Accordingly Prince Dīghāvu rose at night, at
time of dawn, and sang and played the lute with charming voice in the
elephant-stable.

Brahmadatta king of Kāsi heard him as he rose at night, at time
of dawn, and sang and played the lute with charming voice in the
elephant-stable. Hearing him, he asked his men: “Who was it, pray,
that rose at night, at time of dawn, and sang and played the lute
with charming voice in the elephant-stable?” “Your majesty, it was a
young man, the pupil of such-and-such an elephant-trainer, who rose
at night, at time of dawn, and sang and played the lute with charming
voice in the elephant-stable.” “Very well, bring that young man to me.”
“Yes, your majesty,” said those men to Brahmadatta king of Kāsi; and in
obedience to his command brought Prince Dīghāvu to him.

“Was it you, young man, who rose at night, at time of dawn, and sang
and played the lute with charming voice in the elephant-stable?” “Yes,
your majesty.” “Very well, young man, sing and play the lute for me.”
“Yes, your majesty,” said Prince Dīghāvu to Brahmadatta king of Kāsi;
and in obedience to his command, desiring to win his favor, sang and
played the lute with charming voice.

Thereupon Brahmadatta king of Kāsi said this to Prince Dīghāvu: “You,
young man, may wait upon me.” “Yes, your majesty,” said Prince Dīghāvu
to Brahmadatta king of Kāsi, and obeyed his command. And Prince Dīghāvu
rose in advance of Brahmadatta king of Kāsi, retired after him, obeyed
his every command, conducted himself in a pleasing manner, spoke in
a friendly manner. And in no very long time Brahmadatta king of Kāsi
appointed Prince Dīghāvu to a highly confidential position.

Now Brahmadatta king of Kāsi said this to Prince Dīghāvu: “Now then,
young man, harness the chariot; I wish to go a-hunting.” “Yes, your
majesty,” said Prince Dīghāvu to Brahmadatta king of Kāsi. And having,
in obedience to the king’s command, harnessed the chariot, he said this
to Brahmadatta king of Kāsi: “Your majesty, the chariot is harnessed
for you; do as you think fit.” Thereupon Brahmadatta king of Kāsi
mounted the chariot; Prince Dīghāvu drove the chariot. In such wise did
he drive the chariot that the army went one way, the chariot the other.

Now when he had gone a long way, Brahmadatta king of Kāsi said this
to Prince Dīghāvu: “Now then, young man, unharness the chariot. I am
tired: I wish to lie down.” “Yes, your majesty,” said Prince Dīghāvu to
Brahmadatta king of Kāsi; and in obedience to his command unharnessed
the chariot and sat down on the ground cross-legged. And Brahmadatta
king of Kāsi lay down, placing his head in Prince Dīghāvu’s lap. So
tired was he that in the mere fraction of a moment he fell asleep.

Thereupon to Prince Dīghāvu occurred the following thought: “This
Brahmadatta king of Kāsi has done us much injury. He has robbed us of
army and vehicles and territory and treasuries and storehouses. And he
has killed my mother and father. This would be the very time for me
to satisfy my hatred!” And he drew sword from sheath. Then to Prince
Dīghāvu occurred the following thought: “My father said to me in the
hour of death: ‘Dear Dīghāvu, do not look long! Do not look short! For,
dear Dīghāvu, hatreds are not quenched by hatred. Nay rather, dear
Dīghāvu, hatreds are quenched by love.’ It is not fitting that I should
transgress the command of my father.” And he returned sword to sheath.
And this happened a second time, and a third time.

Suddenly Brahmadatta king of Kāsi rose, frightened, agitated, alarmed,
terrified. Thereupon Prince Dīghāvu said this to Brahmadatta king
of Kāsi: “Why, your majesty, did you rise so suddenly, frightened,
agitated, alarmed, terrified?” “Right here, young man, Prince Dīghāvu,
son of Dīghīti king of Kosala, fell upon me with his sword in a dream.
Therefore I rose suddenly, frightened, agitated, alarmed, terrified.”

Then Prince Dīghāvu, stroking the head of Brahmadatta king of Kāsi with
his left hand, and drawing his sword with his right hand, said this to
Brahmadatta king of Kāsi: “I, your majesty, am Prince Dīghāvu, son of
Dīghīti king of Kosala. You have done us much injury. You have robbed
us of army and vehicles and territory and treasuries and storehouses.
And you have killed my mother and father. This would be the very time
for me to satisfy my hatred!”

Thereupon Brahmadatta king of Kāsi prostrated himself on his face at
the feet of Prince Dīghāvu, and said this to Prince Dīghāvu: “Grant me
my life, dear Dīghāvu! Grant me my life, dear Dīghāvu!” “How have I the
power to grant your majesty your life? Your majesty, however, might
grant me my life.” “Very well, dear Dīghāvu. You grant me my life, and
I will grant you your life.” Then Brahmadatta king of Kāsi and Prince
Dīghāvu granted each other their lives and shook hands and swore an
oath not to injure each other.

Then Brahmadatta king of Kāsi said this to Prince Dīghāvu: “Now then,
dear Dīghāvu, harness the chariot; let us be going.” “Yes, your
majesty,” said Prince Dīghāvu to Brahmadatta king of Kāsi. And having,
in obedience to the king’s command, harnessed the chariot, he said this
to Brahmadatta king of Kāsi: “Your majesty, the chariot is harnessed
for you; do as you think fit.” Thereupon Brahmadatta king of Kāsi
mounted the chariot; Prince Dīghāvu drove the chariot. In such wise did
he drive the chariot that in no very long time he came up with the army.

Then Brahmadatta king of Kāsi entered Benāres, caused the ministers of
his council to be assembled, and said this: “If, sirs, you were to
see Prince Dīghāvu, son of Dīghīti king of Kosala, what would you do
to him?” Some spoke thus: “We, your majesty, would cut off his hands.”
Others spoke thus: “We, your majesty, would cut off his feet.” “We
would cut off his hands and feet.” “We would cut off his ears.” “We
would cut off his nose.” “We would cut off his ears and nose.” “We,
your majesty, would cut off his head.” “Sirs, this is Prince Dīghāvu,
son of Dīghīti king of Kosala; it is not permissible to do anything to
him. He has granted me my life, and I have granted him his life.”

Then Brahmadatta king of Kāsi said this to Prince Dīghāvu: “When, dear
Dīghāvu, your father said to you in the hour of death: ‘Dear Dīghāvu,
do not look long! Do not look short! For, dear Dīghāvu, hatreds are
not quenched by hatred. Nay rather, dear Dīghāvu, hatreds are quenched
by love,’ what did your father mean by that?” “When, your majesty, my
father said to me in the hour of death: ‘Not long,’ what he meant was:
‘Do not cherish hatred long.’ This, your majesty, is what my father
meant when he said to me in the hour of death: ‘Not long.’ When, your
majesty, my father said to me in the hour of death: ‘Not short,’ what
he meant was: ‘Do not break with your friends quickly.’ This, your
majesty, is what my father meant when he said to me in the hour of
death: ‘Not short.’

“When, your majesty, my father said to me in the hour of death: ‘For,
dear Dīghāvu, hatreds are not quenched by hatred. Nay rather, dear
Dīghāvu, hatreds are quenched by love,’ what he meant to have me
understand was this: Your majesty has killed my mother and father. Were
I to deprive your majesty of life, your majesty’s well-wishers would
deprive me of life, and my well-wishers would deprive yours of life.
Thus that hatred would not be quenched by hatred. But as matters stand,
your majesty has granted me my life, and I have granted your majesty
his life. Thus hatred has been quenched by love. This, your majesty,
is what my father meant when he said to me in the hour of death: ‘For,
dear Dīghāvu, hatreds are not quenched by hatred. Nay rather, dear
Dīghāvu, hatreds are quenched by love.’”

Thereupon Brahmadatta king of Kāsi exclaimed: “O how wonderful, O how
marvelous, that this Prince Dīghāvu should understand in its fulness a
matter which his father expressed so briefly!” And he restored to him
the army and vehicles and territory and treasuries and storehouses of
his fathers, and gave him his daughter in marriage.

  “For, monks, of these kings who took the rod, who took the sword,
  such is said to have been the patience and gentleness. How much more,
  monks, should you, who have retired from the world under a Doctrine
  and Discipline so well taught, let your light so shine in this world
  as to be known of men as patient and gentle.” And for the third
  time the Exalted One said this to those monks: “Enough, monks! No
  quarreling! No brawling! No contending! No wrangling!”




_7. Antelope, Woodpecker, Tortoise, and Hunter._

_In union there is strength._

Jātaka 206: ii. 152-155.


  On a certain occasion the Teacher related the following story:

In times past, when Brahmadatta ruled at Benāres, the Future Buddha was
an antelope and made his home in a certain thicket in a forest, not
far from a certain lake. Not far from that same lake, on the tip of a
certain tree, perched a woodpecker. Moreover in the lake a tortoise
made his home. Thus did those three live together as friends, kindly
affectionate one towards another.

Now a certain hunter, on his way through the forest, seeing the tracks
of the Future Buddha at the place where the animals went to drink, set
a trap, resembling an iron foot-chain, only made of leathern strips,
and went his way. In the very first watch of the night the Future
Buddha, coming to drink of the water, became entangled in the trap and
cried the cry of a captured animal.

When he made that sound, from the tip of the tree came the woodpecker
and out of the water came the tortoise. And they took counsel
together, saying: “What’s to be done now?” Then said the woodpecker,
addressing the tortoise: “Master, you have teeth; you saw this trap in
two. I’ll go and manage things in such a way that that hunter sha’n’t
come near. Thus, if the two of us do our very best, our friend will
save his life.” And explaining this matter, he uttered the first stanza:

  Come, tortoise! use your teeth, and cut the leathern trap!
  I’ll manage things in such a way the hunter shall not come!

The tortoise began to chew the strips of leather. The woodpecker went
to the village where the hunter lived. At the first signs of dawn,
the hunter took his knife and started to leave the house. The bird,
observing that he was leaving the house, shrieked, flapped his wings,
and struck him in the face just as he was coming out of the front door.
Thought the hunter: “I have been struck by a bird of evil omen.” So he
went back, lay down for a little while, and then got up again and took
his knife.

The bird knew: “This fellow first came out of the front door. This time
he will come out of the back door.” So he went and perched back of the
house. As for the hunter, he thought: “When I went out of the front
door, I saw a bird of evil omen. This time I will go out of the back
door.” So he went out of the back door. Again the bird shrieked, flew
at him, and struck him in the face. The hunter, struck once again by
that bird of evil omen, made up his mind: “That bird will not permit me
to go out.” So he went back, lay down until the dawn came up, and when
it was dawn, took his knife and went out. The bird went quickly and
told the Future Buddha: “The hunter is coming!”

At that moment the tortoise had chewed all of the strips except just
one strap. But his teeth had got to the point where they were ready to
drop, and his jaws were smeared with blood. The Future Buddha saw the
hunter, knife in hand, coming on with lightning-speed. Rending that
strap, he entered the wood. The bird perched on the tip of the tree.
But the tortoise was so weak that he continued to lie right there. The
hunter threw the tortoise into a sack and hung the sack on some stump
or other.

[Illustration: _At that moment the tortoise had chewed all of the
strips except just one strap._]

The Future Buddha came back, looked about, and perceived that the
tortoise had been taken captive. “I will grant my friend the boon of
life!” he resolved. So feigning weakness, he showed himself to the
hunter. “That antelope must be very weak,” thought the hunter: “I will
kill him.” And knife in hand, he started after him. The Future Buddha,
keeping not too far away and not too near, led him on and entered the
forest. When he thought he had gone far enough, he disguised his
tracks, went by another path with the speed of the wind, lifted the
sack on his horn, flung it on the ground, broke it open, and let out
the tortoise. As for the woodpecker, he came down from the tree.

The Future Buddha, admonishing his two friends, said: “I, through you,
have obtained my life. You have done for me what a friend should do for
a friend. At any moment the hunter may come and catch you. Therefore,
Master woodpecker, do you take your fledglings and go elsewhere; and do
you, Master tortoise, enter the water.” They did so.

  The Teacher, as Supreme Buddha, uttered the second stanza:

    The tortoise entered the water,
    The antelope entered the wood,
    The woodpecker from that dangerous path
      Took his fledglings far away.


When the hunter returned to that spot and saw nothing at all, he took
the tattered sack and went to his own house in deep dejection. As for
those three friends, they lived all their lives long with never a break
in their friendly relations, and then passed away according to their
deeds.




_8. Brahmadatta and Mallika._

_Overcome evil with good._

Jātaka 151: ii. 1-5.


  On a certain occasion king Pasenadi Kosala, after deciding
  litigations in the Hall of Justice, came hastily to pay his respects
  to the Teacher. Said the Teacher: “Great king, to decide litigations
  righteously and justly is a good thing. It is the Path to Heaven. But
  this is no remarkable thing, that you, receiving admonition from an
  Omniscient Buddha like me, should decide litigations righteously and
  justly. This alone is remarkable, that kings of old, listening to the
  words of men who were wise but not omniscient, decided litigations
  righteously and justly, avoided the Four Evil Courses, kept inviolate
  the Ten Royal Virtues, ruled justly, and departed fulfilling the Path
  to Heaven.” Then, in response to a request of the king, he related
  the following Story of the Past:

In times past, when Brahmadatta ruled at Benāres, the Future Buddha
received a new existence as the child of his chief consort. On his
name-day he was given the name Prince Brahmadatta. In due time he grew
up. When he was sixteen years old, he went to Takkasilā, acquired
proficiency in all the arts and crafts, and on the death of his father,
became established in the kingdom.

He ruled righteously and justly. He avoided the Four Evil Courses
in rendering judgments. Since he himself ruled so righteously,
the ministers of justice also transacted their affairs with an eye
to righteousness alone. Since the ministers of justice transacted
their affairs righteously, there were no men who brought dishonest
litigations. For lack of them, hubbub over litigations in the king’s
courtyard ceased. Every day ministers of justice took their seats
in the place of litigation, but seeing no one come for litigation,
departed. The place of litigation became abandoned.

The Future Buddha thought: “Since I have been ruling righteously, no
men at all have come for litigation, the hubbub has ceased, the place
of litigation has become abandoned. The time has come for me to find
out whether I have any fault. If I know, ‘This, for example, is a
fault in me,’ I will get rid of it and have to do with good qualities
only.” From that time on he mingled with indoor-folk and tested them
with the question, “Is there anybody who says I have a fault?” He met
with no one who said he had a fault, but heard mentioned only his own
good qualities. “It may be because these people are afraid of me that
they refrain from mentioning faults in me and speak only of my good
qualities.”

He tested the outdoor-folk, but among them also met no one. He tested
those who dwelt within the city. He took his stand in the settlements
at the four gates and tested those who dwelt without the city. Among
them also he met with no one who said he had a fault, but heard
mentioned only his good qualities. “I will test the countryside,”
thought he. So turning over the kingdom to his ministers, he mounted
his chariot, departed from the city in disguise, accompanied only
by his charioteer, and went as far as the frontier testing the
countryside. Meeting with no one who said he had a fault, but hearing
mentioned only his good qualities, he turned back from the frontier and
started back for the city on the highway.

Now at this time a king of Kosala named Mallika, a righteous ruler, was
also trying to find out whether he had any faults. Meeting with no one
among either indoor-folk or others who said he had a fault, but hearing
mentioned only his own good qualities, he went to that region testing
the countryside. Both kings met face to face in a single wagon-track
leading through a swamp. There was no room for either chariot to turn
out.

Now King Mallika’s charioteer said to the charioteer of the king of
Benāres: “Get your chariot out of the way!” Said the charioteer of the
King of Benāres: “Master charioteer, get your chariot out of the way!
In this chariot sits the lord of the realm of Benāres, the mighty king
Brahmadatta!” Retorted King Mallika’s charioteer: “Master charioteer,
in this chariot sits the lord of the realm of Kosala, the mighty king
Mallika! Get your chariot out of the way! Make room for the chariot
of our king!” Thought the charioteer of the king of Benāres: “He also
is every inch a king, to be sure. What’s to be done?” He came to the
conclusion: “This is the way: I will find out the ages of the two kings
and cause the chariot of the younger to turn out and make room for the
chariot of the older.”

Accordingly the charioteer of the king of Benāres asked the other
charioteer the age of the king of Kosala. Comparing the ages of the
two kings, he discovered that both kings were of exactly the same age.
He then made inquiry regarding the extent of his kingdom, his army,
his wealth, his reputation, and his position in respect of caste,
race, and family. He discovered: “Both are lords of kingdoms three
hundred leagues in extent; they are equals as regards army, wealth, and
reputation; they are in the same position in respect of caste, race,
and family.” Then he thought: “I will make room for that king who is
more advanced in the practice of morality.” Accordingly the charioteer
of the king of Benāres asked the charioteer of the king of Kosala:
“What is your king’s practice of morality like?” The charioteer of
the king of Kosala replied: “Such-and-such is our king’s practice of
morality.” And proclaiming, as though they were good qualities, only
the faults of his own king, he uttered the first stanza:

  Firmness he flings in the face of the firm;
  Mallika overcomes kindly with kindness,
  Good with good, evil with evil.
  Such is this king. Charioteer, turn out of the road.

But the charioteer of the king of Benāres said to him: “What! Are these
the good qualities of your own king which you have just recited?”
“Yes.” “Well! If these are his good qualities, what must his faults
be like? Now then, listen.” So saying, the charioteer of the king of
Benāres uttered the second stanza:

  He overcomes anger with kindness,
  He overcomes evil with good,
  The stingy with gifts, the liar with truth.
  Such is this king. Charioteer, turn out of the road.

Hearing these words, King Mallika and his charioteer both got down from
the chariot, unharnessed the horses, removed the chariot, and gave the
road to the king of Benāres.

The king of Benāres admonished King Mallika, saying: “Thus and so must
one do.” Having so said, he went to Benāres, gave alms and performed
the other works of merit, and when his term of life was come to an
end, fulfilled the Path to Heaven.

As for King Mallika, he accepted the admonition of the king of Benāres,
tested the countryside, met with no one who said he had a fault, and
went to his own city. Having given alms and having performed the other
works of merit, when his term of life was come to an end, he also
fulfilled the Path to Heaven.




_9. A Buddhist Tar-Baby._

_Keep the Precepts._

Jātaka 55: i. 272-275.


  _The man whose heart clings not._ This parable was related by the
  Teacher while he was in residence at Jetavana with reference to a
  monk who relaxed effort. For, addressing that monk, the Teacher
  asked: “Monk, is it true, as they allege, that you have relaxed
  effort?” “True, Exalted One!” “Monk,” said the Teacher, “in former
  times wise men exerted themselves on an occasion when it was
  necessary for them to exert themselves, and by so doing attained the
  glory of dominion.” So saying, he related the following Story of the
  Past:

In times past, when Brahmadatta ruled at Benāres, the Future Buddha
received a new existence as the child of the chief consort of that
king. On the day when he received his name, his parents, after
delighting eight hundred Brahmans with all of the Pleasures of Sense,
inquired regarding the signs. The Brahmans, skilled in the discernment
of signs as they were, seeing that he possessed the signs of a Great
Man, made the following prediction: “Great king, the prince possesses
merit; upon your decease he will attain the sovereignty; he will become
the foremost man in the Land of the Rose-apple, and will be celebrated,
will be renowned, for his deeds with the five weapons.” His parents,
hearing these words of the Brahmans, in selecting a name for the
prince, gave him the name Prince Five-weapons.

Now when he reached the age of discretion, when he was about sixteen
years of age, the king addressed him. “Son,” said the king, “acquire
the arts and crafts.” “Under what teacher shall I acquire them, your
majesty?” “Son, go acquire them under a world-renowned teacher who
resides in the city of Takkasilā in the kingdom of Gandhāra; here is
the fee for you to give to this teacher.” So saying, he gave him a
thousand pieces of money and sent him on his way.

The prince went there and acquired the arts and crafts. Having so
done, he took the five weapons which his teacher gave him, bowed to
his teacher, departed from the city of Takkasilā, and girded with the
five weapons, struck into the road leading to Benāres. On the way he
came to a certain forest infested by an ogre named Sticky-hair. Now
at the mouth of the forest men who saw him tried to dissuade him from
entering, saying: “Sir prince, do not enter this forest; an ogre named
Sticky-hair lives here; he kills every man he sees.”

The Future Buddha, confident of himself, fearless as a maned lion,
entered the forest just the same. When he reached the heart of that
forest, that ogre showed himself to the Future Buddha. He had
increased his stature to the height of a palm-tree; he had created for
himself a head as big as a summer-house with bell-shaped pinnacle, eyes
as big as alms-bowls, two tusks as big as giant bulbs or buds; he had
the beak of a hawk; his belly was covered with blotches; his hands and
feet were dark green.

Having shown himself to the Future Buddha, he said: “Where are you
going? halt! you are my prey!” But the Future Buddha said to him:
“Ogre, I knew what I was about when I entered this forest. You would
do well to be careful about attacking me, for with an arrow steeped in
poison will I pierce your flesh and fell you on the spot!” Having thus
threatened him, the Future Buddha fitted to his bow an arrow steeped in
deadly poison and let fly.

It stuck right to the ogre’s hair. Then he let fly, one after another,
fifty arrows. All stuck right to the ogre’s hair. The ogre shook off
every one of those arrows, letting them fall right at his feet, and
approached the Future Buddha. The Future Buddha threatened him once
more, and drawing his sword, smote him with it. The sword, thirty-three
inches long, stuck right to the ogre’s hair. Then he hit him with a
spear. That also stuck right to his hair. Perceiving that the spear had
stuck, he smote him with a club. That also stuck right to his hair.

[Illustration: _Then he hit him with a spear._]

Perceiving that the club had stuck, he said: “Master ogre, you have
never heard of me before. I am Prince Five-weapons. When I entered
this forest infested by you, I took no account of bows and such-like
weapons; when I entered this forest, I took account only of myself. Now
I am going to beat you and pound you into powder and dust!” Having thus
made known his determination, with a yell he struck the ogre with his
right hand. His hand stuck right to the ogre’s hair. He struck him with
his left hand. That also stuck. He struck him with his right foot. That
also stuck. He struck him with his left foot. That also stuck. Thought
he: “I will beat you with my head and pound you into powder and dust!”
He struck him with his head. That also stuck right to the ogre’s hair.

The Future Buddha, snared five times, stuck fast in five places,
dangled from the ogre’s body. But for all that, he was unafraid,
undaunted. As for the ogre, he thought: “This is some lion of a man,
some man of noble birth,--no mere man! For although he has been caught
by an ogre like me, he appears neither to tremble nor to quake! In
all the time I have harried this road, I have never seen a single man
to match him! Why, pray, is he not afraid?” Not daring to eat him, he
asked: “Youth, why are you not afraid? why are you not terrified with
the fear of death?”

“Ogre, why should I be afraid? for in one state of existence one death
is absolutely certain. What’s more, I have in my belly a thunderbolt
for weapon. If you eat me, you will not be able to digest that weapon.
It will tear your insides into tatters and fragments and will kill
you. In that case we’ll both perish. That’s why I’m not afraid!” (In
these terms, we are told, the Future Buddha referred to the Weapon of
Knowledge within himself.)

Hearing this, the ogre thought: “What this youth says is true, every
word of it. From the body of this lion of a man, my stomach would not
be able to digest a fragment of flesh even so small as a kidney bean.
I’ll let him go!” Terrified with the fear of death, he let the Future
Buddha go, saying: “Youth, you’re a lion of a man! I’ll not eat your
flesh. Do you, this moment released from my hand, even as the moon is
released from the Jaws of Rāhu, go gladden the circle of your kinsfolk
and well-wishers!”

Then said the Future Buddha to the ogre: “Ogre, I’ll go presently. But
you, because in a former state of existence also you wrought evil, have
been reborn as an ogre, cruel, red-handed, feeding on the flesh and
blood of others. If in this state of existence also, so long as you
live, you do evil deeds, you will go from darkness to darkness. But
from the moment you saw me, it has been impossible for you to do evil
deeds. Such a crime as taking the life of living beings means rebirth
in hell, in the animal kingdom, in the region of the fathers, in the
world of the fallen deities; should you be reborn in the world of men,
you will live but a short time and soon pass away.”

In such wise did the Future Buddha recite the disadvantages of doing
deeds contrary to the Precepts, and the advantages of keeping the
Five Precepts. With one reason after another he terrified the ogre,
preached the Doctrine to him, subdued him, made him self-denying.
Having established him in the Five Precepts, he bade him practice them.
Then he transformed him into a spirit entitled to receive offerings in
the forest, and having admonished him to be heedful, departed from the
forest. At the mouth of the forest he told his story to human beings.
Then, girded with the five weapons, he went to Benāres and visited his
mother and father. After a time becoming established in the kingdom, he
ruled righteously, gave alms and performed the other works of merit,
and passed away according to his deeds.




_10. Vedabbha and the Thieves._

_Cupidity is the root of ruin._

Jātaka 48: i. 252-256.


  _Whoever seeks advantage by wrong means._ This was said by the
  Teacher while he was in residence at Jetavana with reference to a
  disobedient monk. For to this monk the Teacher said: “Monk, not only
  in your present state of existence are you disobedient, but in a
  previous state of existence also you were just as disobedient. And
  through this same habit of disobedience, because you disregarded the
  words of wise men, you were cleft in twain with a sharp sword and
  left lying on the road. And through your own fault, and yours alone,
  a thousand men met destruction.” So saying, he related the following
  Story of the Past:

In times past, when Brahmadatta ruled at Benāres, there lived in a
certain little village a certain Brahman who knew a charm called the
Vedabbha charm. This charm, we are told, was beyond price, of great
worth. When the moon was in conjunction with a certain constellation,
the Brahman would look up at the sky and recite that charm, and
straightway the Rain of the Seven Jewels would rain from the sky.

At that time the Future Buddha was learning the arts and crafts in
the house of that Brahman. Now one day the Brahman, accompanied by
the Future Buddha, departed from his own village and set out for the
kingdom of Cetiya on some business or other. Along the road, at a
certain place in the forest, five hundred Despatcher-thieves were in
the habit of committing outrages on travelers. They captured both the
Future Buddha and Brahman Vedabbha.

(But why were these thieves called _Despatcher-thieves_? We are told
that whenever they captured two persons, they would _despatch_ one of
them to fetch ransom-money; therefore they were appropriately called
_Despatcher-thieves_. For example, if they captured father and son,
they would say to the father: “Fetch us ransom-money first; then you
may take your son and go.” Similarly, if they captured mother and
daughter, they would despatch the mother; if they captured an older
and a younger brother, they would despatch the older; if they captured
teacher and pupil, they would despatch the pupil.)

So it was on this occasion. Having captured the Brahman Vedabbha, they
despatched the Future Buddha. The Future Buddha bowed to his teacher
and said: “I will return in the course of a day or two. Have no fear.
However, do as I tell you. To-day will occur the conjunction of the
moon which causes the Rain of Riches. Under no circumstances, because
you cannot endure your misfortune, must you recite the charm and cause
the Rain of Riches. If you do so, you will yourself come to ruin,
and these five hundred thieves likewise.” Having thus admonished his
teacher, he went for the ransom-money.

When the sun had set, the thieves bound the Brahman and laid him down.
At that very moment, from the eastern quarter rose the disk of the
full moon. The Brahman surveyed the constellations and reflected: “The
conjunction of the moon which causes the Rain of Riches is at hand. Why
should I endure misfortune? I will recite the charm, cause the Rain of
Riches, give the riches to the thieves, and go where I please.”

Accordingly he addressed the thieves: “Well, thieves, for what purpose
did you capture me?” “For ransom-money, noble sir.” “If you want
ransom-money, quickly free me from my bonds, bathe my head, clothe
me with new garments, perfume me with scents, deck me with flowers,
and set me on my feet.” The thieves, hearing his words, did so. The
Brahman, noting the conjunction of the moon, recited the charm and
looked up at the sky. Straightway jewels fell from the sky.

The thieves gathered up that wealth, wrapped it in folds of their upper
garments, and went their way. The Brahman followed close behind them.
Now a second pack of five hundred thieves captured the first pack of
thieves. “For what purpose did you capture us?” inquired the first.
“For ransom-money,” replied the second. “If you want money, capture
this Brahman. It was he who, by looking up at the sky, caused a Rain of
Riches; he is the man who gave us this wealth.”

The second pack released the first, captured the Brahman, and said to
him: “Give us wealth too.” Said the Brahman: “I would gladly give you
wealth. But the conjunction of the moon which causes the Rain of Riches
will not occur for a year yet. If you want money, have patience, and I
will cause the Rain of Riches then.” At this the thieves became enraged
and said: “Oh, you rascally Brahman! You caused a Rain of Riches for
others but a moment ago, but you tell us to hold our patience for
another year!” So saying, they cleft the Brahman in twain with a sharp
sword and left him lying on the road.

Then the second pack pursued the first pack hotly, fought with; them,
killed every man of them, and took the spoils. Again dividing into two
packs, they fought with each other until one pack of two hundred and
fifty had killed the other. Continuing in this wise, they killed each
other off until there were only two men left. Thus those thousand men
came to ruin. Now those two men, having gotten away with the spoils
by a ruse, hid the spoils in a thicket near a certain village. One sat
guarding the spoils with sword in hand; the other, having procured
rice, entered the village to have some porridge cooked.

“Cupidity is the root of ruin!”

The man sitting by the spoils reflected: “When this fellow returns,
this wealth will have to be divided into two portions. Suppose I were
to strike him with the sword and kill him the very moment he returns!”
So girding on his sword, he sat watching for his companion to return.

His companion reflected: “That wealth will have to be divided into two
portions. Suppose I were to put poison in the porridge, let that fellow
eat it, cause his death, and get the spoils for myself alone!” So when
the porridge was done, he ate some himself, put poison in the rest, and
then took it and went to the thicket.

The moment the second thief took that porridge out and set it down, the
first thief cleft him in twain with his sword and flung his remains
away in a secluded spot. Then he ate that porridge and himself died on
the spot. Thus, by reason of that wealth, every one of those men came
to ruin.

As for the Future Buddha, he returned in the course of a day or two
with the ransom-money. Not seeing his teacher where he had left him,
but seeing the spoils scattered all about, he reflected: “It must be
that my teacher disregarded my words and caused the Rain of Riches; it
must be that all of those men have come to ruin.” And he continued his
walk along the highway.

As he proceeded, he saw his teacher lying on the highway, cleft in
twain. Thought he: “My teacher disregarded my words and is dead.” Then
he gathered firewood, built a pyre, cremated his teacher, and honored
him with forest-flowers.

As he proceeded, he saw farther on five hundred thieves who had met
destruction; farther on yet, two hundred and fifty; and so on until
finally he came upon two. Thought he: “These thousand thieves have come
to ruin save only two. There must be two thieves besides. They also
could never have restrained themselves. Where can they be?”

As he proceeded, he saw the footprints of the two thieves who had
entered the thicket with the spoils. Proceeding farther, he saw first a
heap of riches wrapped up in a bundle, and then one of the two thieves
dead with a porridge-bowl overturned beside him. Then he knew all.
“Such-and-such they must have done,” thought he. Then he reflected:
“Where can that fellow be?” Making a search, he found his body also
flung away in a secluded spot. Then he reflected:

“Our teacher, because he disregarded my words, through his own habit
of disobedience, through his own fault, has come to ruin. Moreover
through him a thousand men besides have perished. Alas! By employing
wrong means, for no reason at all, seeking gain for themselves, these
thieves, like our teacher, must all have come to a fearful end indeed!”
And he recited the following stanza:

  Whoever seeks advantage by wrong means, comes to grief.
  Thieves slew Vedabbha, and all met destruction.

Thus, by the recitation of this stanza, did the Future Buddha preach
the Doctrine. And the spirits of the forest made the forest ring with
their applause. Then said the Future Buddha: “Just as our teacher,
putting forth effort by wrong means, at the wrong time, caused the Rain
of Riches, and thus himself met destruction and became the cause of
others’ ruin, precisely so whoever else besides shall exert himself,
seeking advantage for himself by wrong means, shall himself come to
ruin and shall become the cause of others’ ruin.”

Employing right means, the Future Buddha removed that wealth to his
own home, and during the remainder of the term of life allotted to him
gave alms and performed the other works of merit. And when his life
came to an end, he passed away, fulfilling the Path to Heaven.

  Said the Teacher: “Monk, not only in your present state of existence
  are you disobedient, but in a previous state of existence also you
  were disobedient. And because of your habit of disobedience you came
  to a fearful end.” And having completed this parable, he identified
  the personages in the Birth-story as follows: “At that time the
  Brahman Vedabbha was the disobedient monk, but the pupil was I
  myself.”




_11. The Anger-Eating Ogre._

_Refrain from anger._

Saṁyutta i. 237-238.


  Thus have I heard: Once upon a time the Exalted One was in residence
  at Jetavana. At that time the Exalted One addressed the monks:
  “Monks!” “Reverend Sir!” said those monks to the Exalted One in
  reply. The Exalted One said this:

In former times, monks, a certain ogre, ill-favored, dwarfish, sat
in the seat of Sakka king of gods. Thereat, monks, the gods of the
Thirty-three became annoyed, offended, indignant: “O how wonderful, O
how marvelous, that this ogre, ill-favored, dwarfish, should sit in the
seat of Sakka king of gods!”

The more, monks, the gods of the Thirty-three became annoyed, offended,
indignant, the more did that ogre become handsome and pleasing to look
upon and gracious. Then, monks, the gods of the Thirty-three approached
Sakka king of gods. And having approached, they said this to Sakka king
of gods:

[Illustration: “_Here, Sire, a certain ogre, ill-favored, dwarfish,
sits in your seat._”]

“Here, Sire, a certain ogre, ill-favored, dwarfish, sits in your seat.
Thereat, Sire, the gods of the Thirty-three are annoyed, offended,
indignant: ‘O how wonderful, O how marvelous, that this ogre,
ill-favored, dwarfish, should sit in the seat of Sakka king of gods!’
The more, Sire, the gods of the Thirty-three become annoyed, offended,
indignant, the more does that ogre become handsome and pleasing to look
upon and gracious. For, Sire, of a surety he must be an anger-eating
ogre!”

Thereupon, monks, Sakka king of gods approached that anger-eating ogre.
And having approached, he adjusted his upper robe so as to cover one
shoulder only, touched his right kneepan to the ground, bent his joined
hands in reverent salutation before that anger-eating ogre, and thrice
proclaimed his name: “Sire, I am Sakka king of gods! Sire, I am Sakka
king of gods! Sire, I am Sakka king of gods!”

The more, monks, Sakka king of gods proclaimed his name, the more did
that ogre become ill-favored and dwarfish. And having become more
ill-favored and dwarfish, he then and there disappeared.

Then, monks, Sakka king of gods sat down in his own seat, and appealing
to the gods of the Thirty-three, uttered at that time the following
stanzas:

  I am not easily vexed in spirit,
  I am not easily led into a turning,
  I do not cherish anger long, be sure;
  Anger has no abiding-place in me.

  I speak no harsh words in anger,
  I do not praise my own virtues,
  I restrain myself,
  Intent on my own good.




_12. The Patient Woman._

_Patient is as patient does._

Majjhima i. 125-126.


  On a certain occasion the Exalted One addressed the monks as follows:
  “Monks, put away evil; devote yourselves to good works: so shall
  you obtain increase, growth, development, in this Doctrine and
  Discipline.”

In olden times, in this very city of Sāvatthi, lived a house-mistress
named Vedehikā. Of Mistress Vedehikā prevailed the following excellent
reputation: “Gentle is Mistress Vedehikā, meek is Mistress Vedehikā,
tranquil is Mistress Vedehikā.” And Mistress Vedehikā had a servant
named Blackie who was capable and industrious and performed her duties
well.

Now to Servant Blackie occurred the following thought: “Of my lady
mistress prevails the following excellent reputation: ‘Gentle is
Mistress Vedehikā, meek is Mistress Vedehikā, tranquil is Mistress
Vedehikā.’ But has her ladyship, in point of fact, an inward temper
which she does not reveal, or has she not? Or is it solely because I
have performed these duties well that her ladyship does not reveal an
inward temper which, in point of fact, she does possess;--not because
she does not possess it? Suppose I were to test her ladyship!”

Accordingly Servant Blackie got up late in the day. And Mistress
Vedehikā said this to Servant Blackie: “See here, Blackie!” “What is
it, my lady?” “Why did you get up so late?” “For no reason at all, my
lady.” “For no reason at all, worthless servant, you got up so late!”
And Mistress Vedehikā frowned in anger and displeasure.

Then to Servant Blackie occurred the following thought: “Her ladyship
does, in point of fact, possess an inward temper which she does not
reveal;--it is not because she does not possess it. It is solely
because I have performed these duties well that her ladyship does not
reveal an inward temper which, in point of fact, she does possess;--it
is not because she does not possess it. Suppose I were to test her
ladyship further!”

Accordingly Servant Blackie got up later in the day. And Mistress
Vedehikā said this to Servant Blackie: “See here, Blackie!” “What is
it, my lady?” “Why did you get up so late?” “For no reason at all,
my lady.” “For no reason at all, worthless servant, you got up so
late!” And in anger and displeasure Mistress Vedehikā gave vent to her
displeasure in words.

Then to Servant Blackie occurred the following thought: “Her ladyship
does, in point of fact, possess an inward temper which she does not
reveal;--it is not because she does not possess it. It is solely
because I have performed these duties well that her ladyship does not
reveal an inward temper which, in point of fact, she does possess;--it
is not because she does not possess it. Suppose I were to test her
ladyship further!”

Accordingly Servant Blackie got up even later in the day. And Mistress
Vedehikā said this to Servant Blackie: “See here, Blackie!” “What is
it, my lady?” “Why did you get up so late?” “For no reason at all, my
lady.” “For no reason at all, worthless servant, you got up so late!”
And in anger and displeasure Mistress Vedehikā seized the pin of the
door-bolt and gave her a blow on the head, breaking her head.

Thereupon Servant Blackie, with broken head streaming with blood,
complained to the neighbors: “See, my lady, the work of the gentle
woman! See, my lady, the work of the meek woman! See, my lady, the work
of the tranquil woman! For this is the way a lady acts who keeps but a
single servant: ‘You got up too late!’ says she. So what must she do
but seize the pin of the door-bolt and give you a blow on the head and
break your head!”

The result was that after a time Mistress Vedehikā acquired the
following evil reputation: “Cruel is Mistress Vedehikā, no meek woman
is Mistress Vedehikā, no tranquil woman is Mistress Vedehikā!”

  “Precisely so, monks, here in this world, many a monk is ever so
  gentle, ever so meek, ever so tranquil, so long as unpleasant remarks
  do not reach him. But when, monks, unpleasant remarks reach a monk,
  that is the time to find out whether he is really gentle, really
  meek, really tranquil.”




_13. Blind Men and Elephant._

_Avoid vain wrangling._

Udāna vi. 4: 66-69.


  Thus have I heard: Once upon a time the Exalted One was in residence
  at Jetavana, near Sāvatthi. Now at that time there entered Sāvatthi
  for alms a company of heretics, both monks and Brahmans, wandering
  ascetics, holding heretical views, patient of heresy, delighting in
  heresy, relying upon the reliance of heretical views. There were some
  monks and Brahmans who held this doctrine, who held this view: “The
  world is eternal. This view alone is truth; any other is folly.” But
  there were other monks and Brahmans who held this view: “The world is
  not eternal. This view alone is truth; any other is folly.” Some held
  that the world is finite, others that the world is infinite. Some
  held that the soul and the body are identical, others that the soul
  and the body are distinct.

  They quarreled and brawled and wrangled and struck one another with
  the daggers of their tongues, saying: “This is right, that is not
  right;” “This is not right, that is right.”

  Now in the morning a company of monks put on their under-garments,
  took bowl and robe, and entered Sāvatthi for alms. And when they had
  made their alms-pilgrimage in Sāvatthi, they returned from their
  pilgrimage. And when they had eaten their breakfast, they approached
  the Exalted One. And having approached, they saluted the Exalted
  One and sat down on one side. And sitting on one side, those monks
  reported the matter to the Exalted One.

  “The heretics, O monks, the wandering ascetics, are blind, without
  eyes; know not good, know not evil; know not right, know not wrong.
  Knowing not good, knowing not evil, knowing not right, knowing not
  wrong, they quarrel and brawl and wrangle and strike one another with
  the daggers of their tongues, saying: ‘This is right, that is not
  right;’ ‘This is not right, that is right.’”

In olden times, in this very city of Sāvatthi, there was a certain
king. And that king ordered a certain man: “Come, my man, assemble in
one place all the men in Sāvatthi who are blind from birth.” “Yes, your
majesty,” said that man to that king. And when, in obedience to the
king’s command, he had laid hands on all the men in Sāvatthi who were
blind from birth, he approached that king. And having approached, he
said this to that king: “Your majesty, the blind from birth in Sāvatthi
are assembled for you.” “Very well! Now let the blind men feel of
the elephant.” “Yes, your majesty,” said that man to that king. And
in obedience to the king’s command he let the blind men feel of the
elephant, saying: “This, O blind men, is what an elephant is like.”

Some of the blind men he let feel of the elephant’s head, saying:
“This, O blind men, is what an elephant is like.” Some of the blind
men he let feel of the elephant’s ears, saying: “This, O blind men, is
what an elephant is like.” Some of the blind men he let feel of the
elephant’s tusks, saying: “This, O blind men, is what an elephant is
like.” Others he let feel of the trunk, saying the same. Others he
let feel of the belly, others of the legs, others of the back, others
of the tail, saying to each and to all: “This, O blind men, is what an
elephant is like.”

Now when that man had let the blind men feel of the elephant, he
approached that king. And having approached, he said this to that king:
“Your majesty, those blind men have felt of the elephant; do as you
think fit.”

Then that king approached those blind men. And having approached,
he said this to those blind men: “Blind men, have you felt of the
elephant?” “Yes, your majesty, we have felt of the elephant.” “Tell me,
blind men, what is an elephant like?”

The blind men who had felt of the elephant’s head, said: “Your
majesty, an elephant is like a water-pot.” The blind men who had felt
of the elephant’s ears, said: “Your majesty, an elephant is like a
winnowing-basket.” The blind men who had felt of the elephant’s tusks,
said: “Your majesty, an elephant is like a plow-share.” Those who had
felt of the trunk, said: “An elephant is like a plow-pole.” Those who
had felt of the belly, said: “An elephant is like a granary.” Those
who had felt of the legs, said: “An elephant is like pillars.” Those
who had felt of the back, said: “An elephant is like a mortar.” The
blind men who had felt of the elephant’s tail, said: “Your majesty, an
elephant is like a fan.”

And they fought among themselves with their fists, saying: “This is
what an elephant is like, that is not what an elephant is like;” “This
is not what an elephant is like, that is what an elephant is like.” And
thereat that king was delighted.

  “Precisely so, O monks, the heretics, the wandering ascetics, are
  blind, without eyes; know not good, know not evil; know not right,
  know not wrong. Knowing not good, knowing not evil, knowing not
  right, knowing not wrong, they quarrel and brawl and wrangle and
  strike one another with the daggers of their tongues, saying: ‘This
  is right, that is not right;’ ‘This is not right, that is right.’”




_14. King and Boar._

_Evil communications corrupt good manners._

Jātaka 186: ii. 101-106.


  On a certain occasion the Teacher addressed the monks as follows:
  “Monks, contact with the corrupt is a bad thing, an injurious thing.
  Indeed, why should it be necessary to discuss the injurious effect on
  human beings of contact with the corrupt, when in times past even a
  senseless mango tree, with flavor as sweet as the flavor of celestial
  fruit, through contact with sour, unpalatable nimbs, turned sour and
  bitter?”


_Part. 1. Gem, hatchet, drum, and bowl._

In times past, when Brahmadatta ruled at Benāres, four Brahman brothers
in the kingdom of Kāsi adopted the life of ascetics, and building a
row of leaf-huts in the Himālaya region, took up their abode there.
The eldest of the four brothers died and was reborn as Sakka, king of
gods. Knowing who he had been, he went from time to time, every seven
or eight days, and ministered to his former brothers.

One day he saluted the eldest ascetic, sat down on one side, and asked:
“Reverend Sir, is there anything you need?” The ascetic, who was
suffering from jaundice, said: “I need fire.” Sakka gave him a little
hatchet. Said the ascetic: “Who will take this and fetch me wood?”
Then Sakka said to him: “When, Reverend Sir, you need wood, just rub
this hatchet with your hand and say: ‘Please fetch me wood and make me
a fire.’ And the hatchet will fetch wood, make a fire, and turn it over
to you.”

Having given him the little hatchet, Sakka went to the second ascetic
and asked: “Reverend Sir, what do you need?” Past his leaf-hut ran
an elephant-track. Since the elephants bothered him, he said: “The
elephants annoy me; drive them away.” Sakka presented a drum to him,
saying, “Reverend Sir, if you beat this side, your enemies will flee;
if you beat that, they will become kindly disposed and will surround
you with a fourfold army.”

Having given him the drum, Sakka went to the youngest ascetic and
asked: “Reverend Sir, what do you want?” He also was afflicted with
jaundice; therefore he said: “I want curds.” Sakka gave him a bowl of
curds, saying: “If you invert this and make a wish, the curds will turn
into a mighty river, will set flowing a mighty flood, and will even be
able to get and give you a kingdom.” So saying, he went his way.

From that time on the little hatchet made fire for the eldest brother;
when the second brother beat the drum, the elephants fled; the youngest
brother enjoyed his curds.

At that time a boar, rooting among the ruins of a village, caught
sight of a gem endowed with magical power. He bit the gem, and by its
magical power rose into the air. Seeing a little island in mid-ocean,
he thought: “There now is the place for me to live.” So he descended
and made his home in a pleasant place under a fig tree.

One day the boar lay down at the foot of that tree, placed the gem in
front of him, and fell asleep.

Now a certain man who lived in the kingdom of Kāsi, driven from home by
his mother and father with the remark, “He’s no good to us,” went to a
certain seaport, hired himself out to mariners, and embarked on a ship.
In mid-ocean the ship sprang a leak, and he floated to that island on
a plank. While seeking wild fruits he saw that boar. Creeping up, he
seized the gem. By its magical power he rose into the air. Seating
himself on the fig tree, he thought: “This boar, become an air-voyager
by the magical power of this gem, lives here, I suppose. But I must
not go back without first of all killing him and eating his flesh.” He
broke off a twig and let it fall on the boar’s head. The boar woke up,
but not seeing the gem, ran this way and that, all of a tremble. The
man sitting in the tree laughed. The boar looked, and seeing him, ran
his head against the tree, and died then and there. The man came down,
made a fire, and cooked the boar’s flesh and ate it. Then he rose into
the air and passed over the tops of the Himālayas.

Seeing a region of hermitages, he descended at the hermitage of the
eldest ascetic. He lived there for two or three days, performed the
major and minor duties for the ascetic, and saw the magical power of
the little hatchet. “This I must get,” thought he. Accordingly, after
demonstrating to the ascetic the magical power of the gem, he said:
“Reverend Sir, take this gem and give me the little hatchet.” The
ascetic, having a desire to travel through the air, took the gem and
gave him the little hatchet.

[Illustration: _He bit the gem, and by its magical power rose into the
air._]

The man took the little hatchet and went a short distance. Then he
rubbed the little hatchet and said: “Little hatchet, chop off the
ascetic’s head and bring me the gem.” The little hatchet went and
chopped off the ascetic’s head and brought him the gem. The man put
the little hatchet in a secret place, and then went to the second
ascetic and lived with him for a few days. Seeing the magical power
of the drum, he gave the second ascetic the gem, took the drum, and
in the same way as before caused his head also to be cut off. Then he
approached the youngest ascetic. Seeing the magical power of the bowl
of curds, he gave the youngest ascetic the gem, took the bowl of
curds, and in the same way as before caused his head to be cut off.

Then he took the gem and the little hatchet and the drum and the bowl
of curds, and rose into the air. Halting not far from Benāres, he sent,
by the hand of a certain man, the following message to the king of
Benāres: “Give me battle or the kingdom!” As soon as the king heard the
message, he said: “Let’s catch the bandit;” and sallied forth. The man
beat the proper side of the drum, and a fourfold army surrounded him.
Perceiving that the king had deployed his forces, he turned the bowl of
curds loose. A mighty river began to flow, and the multitude sank down
in the curds and were unable to extricate themselves. Then he rubbed
the little hatchet and said: “Bring me the king’s head.” The little
hatchet went and brought the king’s head and laid it at his feet. Not a
single soldier had the power to lift a weapon. Accompanied by a mighty
force, the man entered the city and caused himself to be sprinkled
king. Having become king under the name King of the Curds, he ruled
with righteousness.


_Part 2. Corrupt fruit from a good tree._

One day, while he was amusing himself in the mighty river, in an
enclosure formed by a net, there floated up and lodged in the net a
single mango fruit fit for the gods. When they lifted the net they
saw it and gave it to the king. It was of large size, as big as a
water-pot, perfectly round, and of a golden color. The king asked his
foresters: “What is that the fruit of?” “The fruit of a mango tree.”
Having eaten it, he caused the stone to be planted in his own garden,
and to be sprinkled with milk and water. The tree sprouted, and in the
third year bore fruit.

Great was the honor rendered to the mango. They sprinkled it with milk
and water, they made marks of the spread hand with scented ointment on
it, they festooned it with wreaths and ropes of flowers, they burned
lamps with perfumed oil before it, and round about it they hung a
curtain of fine cloth.

The fruit was sweet and of a golden color. When the king sent the fruit
of the mango to other kings, he pierced with a thorn the spot where
the sprout starts, for fear a tree might sprout from the stone. When,
after eating the mango fruit, they planted the stone, nothing happened.
“What, pray, can be the cause of this?” they inquired, and discovered
the cause.

Now a certain other king summoned his gardener and asked: “Can you
spoil the flavor of my rival’s mango fruit and make it bitter?” “Yes,
your majesty.” “Very well, go.” So saying, he gave him a thousand
pieces of money and sent him off. The gardener went to Benāres, caused
the king to be informed that a gardener had arrived, managed to have
himself summoned by the king, and entering the palace, made obeisance
to the king. “Are you the gardener?” asked the king. “Yes, your
majesty,” said the gardener, and described his own marvelous powers.
Said the king: “Go, assist our gardener.”

From that time on the two men cared for the garden. The newly arrived
gardener caused flowers to blossom out of season and fruits to grow out
of season, and made the garden a charming place. The king, pleased with
the new gardener, dismissed the old gardener, and gave the new gardener
exclusive charge of the garden. The new gardener, realizing that the
garden was in his own hands, planted nimbs and pot-herbs and creepers
all around the mango tree.

In the course of time the nimbs grew up. Roots with roots, branches
with branches, were in contact, entangled, intertwined. Merely through
this contact with the sour, unpalatable nimbs, the sweet fruit of the
mango turned bitter, and its flavor became like the flavor of the
leaves of the nimbs. The gardener, knowing that the fruit of the mango
had turned bitter, fled.

The king went to the garden and ate a mango fruit. As soon as he put
the mango into his mouth, perceiving that the juice tasted like the
vile juice of the nimb, he was unable to swallow it, and coughing it
up, spat it out. Now at that time the Future Buddha was his counsellor
in temporal and spiritual matters. The king addressed the Future
Buddha: “Wise man, this tree is just as well cared for now as it was of
old. But in spite of this, its fruit has turned bitter. What, pray, is
the reason?” And by way of inquiry he uttered the first stanza:

  Color, fragrance, flavor, had this mango before.
  Receiving the same honor, why has the mango bitter fruit?

Then the Future Buddha told him the reason by uttering the second
stanza:

  Your mango, O king, is surrounded with nimbs,
  Root touches root, branches entwine about branches.
  Through contact with the bad, therefore your mango has bitter fruit.

The king, hearing his words, had every one of the nimbs and pot-herbs
chopped down, the roots pulled up, the sour earth round about removed,
sweet earth put in its place, and the mango fed with milk and water,
sweetened water, and perfumed water. Through contact with sweet juices
the mango became perfectly sweet again. The king gave the regular
gardener sole charge of the garden, and after living out his allotted
term of life, passed away according to his deeds.




15. _A Buddhist Henny-Penny._

_Much ado about nothing._

Jātaka 322: iii. 74-78.


  On a certain occasion the Teacher, referring to the
  self-mortification of the Hindu ascetics, said to the monks: “Monks,
  there is no value, no merit, in their self-mortification. It is like
  the ‘rat-a-tat’ the little hare heard.” Said the monks: “We do not
  understand what you mean by saying that it is like the ‘rat-a-tat’
  the little hare heard. Tell us about it, Reverend Sir.” So in
  response to their request the Teacher related the following Story of
  the Past:

In times past, when Brahmadatta ruled at Benāres, the Future Buddha was
reborn as a lion, and when he grew up, lived in a forest. At that time,
near the Western Ocean, grew a grove of cocoanut trees intermingled
with Vilva trees. There, at the foot of a Vilva tree, under a cocoanut
sapling, lived a little hare. One day, returning with food, he lay down
under a cocoanut leaf and thought: “If this earth should collapse, what
would ever become of me?”

At that very instant a Vilva fruit fell on top of the cocoanut leaf.
At the sound of it the little hare thought: “This earth is certainly
collapsing!” And springing to his feet, back he ran, without so much
as taking a look. As he was running away as fast as he could in fear
of death, another little hare saw him and asked: “Why, pray, are you
running away in such a fright?” “Oh, don’t ask me!” And he kept right
on running, in spite of the fact that the other little hare kept
asking: “Oh! what is it? Oh! what is it?” The other little hare turned
around, and without so much as taking a look, said: “The earth is
collapsing here!” He also ran away, following the first.

In the same way a third little hare saw the second, and a fourth the
third, until finally there were a hundred thousand little hares running
away together. A deer saw them,--also a boar, an elk, a buffalo, an ox,
a rhinoceros, a tiger, a lion, and an elephant. Seeing, each asked:
“What’s this?” “The earth is collapsing here!” Each ran away. Thus, in
the course of time, there was an army of animals a league in size.

At that time the Future Buddha, seeing that army running away, asked:
“What’s this?” “The earth is collapsing here!” When the Future Buddha
heard this, he thought: “No such thing! The earth is collapsing
nowhere! It must certainly be that they failed to understand something
they heard. But if I do not put forth effort, they will all perish. I
will grant them their lives.”

With the speed of a lion he preceded them to the foot of a mountain
and thrice roared the roar of a lion. Terrified with fear of the lion,
they turned around and stood all huddled together. The lion made his
way in among them and asked: “Why are you running away?” “The earth is
collapsing!” “Who saw it collapsing?” “The elephants know.” He asked
the elephants. Said the elephants: “We don’t know; the lions know.”
Said the lions: “We don’t know; the tigers know.” The tigers: “The
rhinoceroses know.” The rhinoceroses: “The oxen know.” The oxen: “The
buffaloes.” The buffaloes: “The elks.” The elks: “The boars.” The
boars: “The deer.” The deer: “We don’t know; the little hares know.”

When the little hares were asked, they pointed out that little hare and
said: “He’s the one that told us.” So the lion asked the little hare:
“Friend, is it true, as you say, that the earth is collapsing?” “Yes,
master, I saw it.” “Where were you living when you saw it?” asked the
lion. “Near the Western Ocean, in a grove of cocoanut trees mingled
with Vilva trees. For there, at the foot of a Vilva tree, under a
cocoanut sapling, beneath a cocoanut leaf, I lay and thought: ‘If the
earth collapses, where shall I go?’ That very instant I heard the sound
of the earth collapsing. So I ran away.”

The lion thought: “Evidently a Vilva fruit fell on top of that
cocoanut leaf and made a ‘rat-a-tat,’ and this hare here, hearing
that sound, came to the conclusion: ‘The earth is collapsing!’ I will
find out for a fact.” So the lion, taking the little hare with him,
reassured the throng, saying: “I am going to find out for a fact
whether or not the earth collapsed at the spot where the little hare
saw what he saw; having so done, I will return. Until I return, all of
you remain right here.”

So taking the little hare on his back, he sprang forward with the speed
of a lion. And setting the little hare down in the cocoanut grove, he
said: “Come, show me the spot where you saw what you saw.” “I don’t
dare, master.” “Come, don’t be afraid.” The little hare, not daring to
approach the Vilva tree, stood no great distance off and said: “That,
master, is the spot where it went ‘rat-a-tat.’” So saying, he uttered
the first stanza:

  “Rat-a-tat” it went,--I wish you luck,--
  In the region where I dwell.
  But as for me, I do not know
  What made that “rat-a-tat.”

When the little hare said this, the lion went to the foot of the Vilva
tree, looked at the spot beneath the cocoanut leaf where the little
hare had lain, and observed that a Vilva fruit had fallen on top of
the cocoanut leaf. And knowing for a fact that the earth had not
collapsed, he took the little hare on his back, went quickly, with the
speed of a lion, to the assemblage of animals, informed them of all
the facts, reassured the throng of animals by saying, “Fear not,” and
released the little hare.

For if, at that time, the Future Buddha had not come to the rescue,
they would all have run down into the sea and perished. It was through
the Future Buddha that they obtained their lives.

  Hearing a Vilva fruit fall,--“rat-a-tat,”--the hare ran.
  Hearing the hare’s words, a host of animals were frightened.

  Those who have not attained consciousness of their portion,
  Those who follow the voice of others,
  Those who are given to heedlessness,--the foolish,--
  They attain what others attain.

  But those who are endowed with morality,
  Those who delight in the tranquillity of wisdom,
  Those who abstain and refrain from worldly delights,--the wise,--
  They attain what others attain not.

  (These three stanzas were uttered by the Supremely Enlightened One.)

  When the Teacher had related this parable, he identified the
  personages in the Birth-story as follows: “At that time the lion was
  I myself.”

[Illustration: _So taking the little hare on his back, he sprang
forward with the speed of a lion._]




_16. The Birds._

_Nobody loves a beggar._

Vinaya iii. 147-148.


  On a certain occasion the Exalted One reproved the monks for begging.
  Said he:

In olden times a certain monk dwelt on a slope of Himavat in a certain
forest-grove. Not far from that forest-grove was a great marsh, a
swamp. Now a large flock of birds sought food in that swamp in the
daytime, returning to that forest-grove at eventide to roost. Now that
monk, driven away by the noise of that flock of birds, approached me,
and having approached, saluted me and sat down on one side. And as he
sat on one side, I said this to that monk:

“I trust, monk, that you have suffered no discomfort. I trust that you
have received sufficient sustenance. I trust that you have made your
journey without fatigue. And, monk, whence have you come?”

“I have suffered no discomfort, Exalted One. I have received sufficient
sustenance. I have made my journey without fatigue. Reverend Sir, on
a slope of Himavat is a large forest-grove. And not far from that
forest-grove is a great marsh, a swamp. Now a large flock of birds seek
food in that swamp in the daytime, returning to that forest-grove at
eventide to roost. Thence, Reverend Sir, do I come, driven away by the
noise of that flock of birds.”

“But, monk, do you wish that flock of birds never to come back again?”
“I wish that flock of birds never to come back again.”

“Well then, monk, go there, plunge into that forest-grove, and
throughout the watches of the night cry out: ‘Let the pretty birds hear
me, as many as roost in this forest-grove! I want feathers! Let the
pretty birds each give me a feather!’”

So that monk went there, plunged into that forest-grove, and throughout
the watches of the night cried out: “Let the pretty birds hear me, as
many as roost in this forest-grove! I want feathers! Let the pretty
birds each give me a feather!”

Thereupon that flock of birds, reflecting, “The monk begs feathers,
the monk wants feathers,” departed from that forest-grove. When they
departed, they departed indeed, and never came back again.

  “For, monks, to living beings in the form of animals, begging is said
  to have been offensive, hinting is said to have been offensive. How
  much more so must it be to human beings!”




_17. Dragon Jewel-Neck._

_Nobody loves a beggar._


_A. Canonical version._

Vinaya iii. 145-147.

  On a certain occasion the Exalted One reproved the monks for begging.
  Said he:

In olden times two ascetics, brothers, lived by the Ganges river. Now
Jewel-neck, a dragon-king, came out of the Ganges, approached the
younger ascetic, and having approached, encircled the younger ascetic
seven times with his coils and rose and spread his huge hood over his
head. And the younger ascetic, for fear of that dragon, became lean,
dried-up, pale, yellow as ever was yellow, his body strewn with veins.

The older ascetic saw the younger ascetic lean, dried-up, pale, yellow
as ever was yellow, his body strewn with veins. Seeing, he said this
to the younger ascetic: “Why are you lean, dried-up, pale, yellow as
ever was yellow, your body strewn with veins?” “While I was here,
Jewel-neck, a dragon-king, came out of the Ganges river, approached me,
and having approached, encircled me seven times with his coils and
rose and spread his huge hood over my head. For fear of him I am lean,
dried-up, pale, yellow as ever was yellow, my body strewn with veins.”

“But do you wish that dragon never to come back again?” “I wish that
dragon never to come back again.” “Well, but do you see anything on
that dragon?” “I see he wears a jewel on his neck.” “Well then, ask
that dragon for the jewel, saying: ‘Give me the jewel! I want the
jewel!’”

Now Jewel-neck the dragon-king came out of the Ganges river, approached
the younger ascetic, and having approached, stood aside. As he stood
aside, the younger ascetic said this to Jewel-neck the dragon-king:
“Give me the jewel! I want the jewel!” Thereupon Jewel-neck the
dragon-king, reflecting, “The monk begs the jewel, the monk wants the
jewel,” quickly enough departed.

Three times did the younger ascetic beg the jewel of Jewel-neck the
dragon-king, and three times did Jewel-neck the dragon-king depart. The
third time, Jewel-neck the dragon-king addressed the younger ascetic
with stanzas:

  My food and drink, abundant, choice,
  I get by the power of this jewel.
  This I will not give you,--you ask too much;
  Nor will I even come back again to your hermitage.

  Like a lad with sand-washed sword in hand,
  You frighten me, asking for the stone.
  This I will not give you,--you ask too much;
  Nor will I even come back again to your hermitage.

Thereupon Jewel-neck the dragon-king, reflecting, “The monk begs the
jewel, the monk wants the jewel,” departed. When he departed, he
departed indeed, and never came back again. And the younger ascetic,
because he saw no more that dragon so fair to see, became more than
ever lean, dried-up, pale, yellow as ever was yellow, his body strewn
with veins.

When the older ascetic saw the younger ascetic altered in appearance,
he inquired the reason. The younger ascetic told him. Then the older
ascetic addressed the younger ascetic with a stanza:

  One should not beg or seek to get what is dear to another.
  Odious does one become by asking overmuch.
  When the Brahman asked the dragon for the jewel,
  Never again did the dragon let himself be seen.

  “For, monks, to living beings in the form of animals, begging is said
  to have been offensive, hinting is said to have been offensive. How
  much more so must it be to human beings!”


_B. Uncanonical version._

Jātaka 258: ii. 283-286.

  On a certain occasion the Exalted One reproved the monks for begging.
  Said he: “Monks, begging is offensive even to dragons, though the
  World of Dragons wherein they dwell is filled to overflowing with the
  Seven Jewels. How much more so must it be to human beings, from whom
  it is as difficult to wring a penny as it is to skin a flint!” So
  saying, he related the following Story of the Past:

In times past, when Brahmadatta ruled at Benāres, the Future Buddha was
reborn in a Brahman household of great wealth. When he was old enough
to walk and could run hither and thither, another being of merit also
received a new existence as his brother. When both brothers reached
manhood, their mother and father died. In agitation of heart over
their death, both brothers adopted the life of ascetics, and building
leaf-huts on the bank of the Ganges, took up their residence there. The
older brother’s hut was up the Ganges; the younger brother’s hut was
down the Ganges.

Now one day a dragon-king named Jewel-neck came forth from the World
of Dragons, walked along the bank of the Ganges disguised as a Brahman
youth, came to the hermitage of the younger ascetic, bowed, and sat
down on one side. The dragon-king and the younger ascetic greeted each
other in a cordial manner, and became fast friends and inseparable
companions.

Every day Jewel-neck would come to the hermitage of the younger ascetic
and sit down and talk and converse with him. When it was time for him
to go, out of affection for the ascetic he would lay aside his human
form, encircle the ascetic with his coils, and embrace him, holding his
huge hood over his head. Having remained in this position for a time,
and having dispelled his affection, he would unwind his body, bow to
the ascetic, and go back again to his own abode.

The ascetic, for fear of him, became lean, dried-up, pale, yellow as
ever was yellow, his body strewn with veins. One day he went to visit
his brother. The latter asked him: “Why are you lean, dried-up, pale,
yellow as ever was yellow, your body strewn with veins?” He told him
the facts. The older ascetic asked: “But do you or do you not wish that
dragon never to come back again?” The younger ascetic said: “I do not.”
“But when that dragon-king comes to your hermitage, what ornament does
he wear?” “A jewel.”

“Well then, when that dragon-king comes to your hermitage, before he
has a chance to sit down, ask, saying: ‘Give me the jewel.’ If you do
so, that dragon-king will depart without so much as encircling you
with his coils. On the next day you must stand at the door of your
hermitage and ask him just as he approaches. On the third day you must
stand on the bank of the Ganges and ask him just as he comes out of the
water. If you do so, he will not come back to your hermitage.”

[Illustration: _Every day Jewel-neck the dragon-king would encircle him
with his coils._]

“Very well,” assented the ascetic, and went to his own leaf-hut. On the
next day the dragon-king came and stopped at the hermitage. The moment
he stopped, the ascetic asked: “Give me this jewel you wear.” Without
so much as sitting down, the dragon-king fled. On the second day the
ascetic, standing at the door of the hermitage, said to the dragon-king
just as he approached: “Yesterday you would not give me the jewel;
to-day I must have it.” Without so much as entering the hermitage, the
dragon-king fled. On the third day the ascetic said to the dragon-king
just as he came out of the water: “This is the third day I have asked;
give me this jewel now.” The dragon-king, still remaining in the water,
refused the ascetic, reciting these two stanzas:

  My food and drink, abundant, choice,
  I get by the power of this jewel.
  This I will not give you,--you ask too much;
  Nor will I even come back again to your hermitage.

  Like a lad with sand-washed sword in hand,
  You frighten me, asking for the stone.
  This I will not give you,--you ask too much;
  Nor will I even come back again to your hermitage.

So saying, that dragon-king plunged into the water, went back to his
own World of Dragons, and never came back again. And that ascetic,
because he saw no more that dragon-king so fair to see, became more
than ever lean, dried-up, pale, yellow as ever was yellow, his body
strewn with veins.

Now the older ascetic, thinking, “I will find out how my younger
brother is getting on,” went to visit him. Seeing that he was suffering
more than ever from jaundice, he said: “How comes it that you are
suffering more than ever from jaundice?” “Because I see no more that
dragon so fair to see.” “This ascetic cannot get along without the
dragon-king,” concluded the older ascetic, and recited the third stanza:

  One should not beg or seek to get what is dear to another.
  Odious does one become by asking overmuch.
  When the Brahman asked the dragon for the jewel,
  Never again did the dragon let himself be seen.

Having thus addressed him, the older ascetic comforted him, saying:
“Henceforth grieve not;” and went back again to his own hermitage.

  Said the Teacher: “Thus, monks, even to dragons, though the World
  of Dragons wherein they dwell is filled to overflowing with the
  Seven Jewels, begging is offensive. How much more so must it be to
  human beings!” And having completed this parable, he identified the
  personages in the Birth-story as follows: “At that time the younger
  brother was my favorite disciple, but the older brother was I myself.”




_18. Snake-Charm._

_A blessing upon all living beings!_


_A. Canonical version._

Vinaya ii. 109-110.

  Now at that time a certain monk was bitten by a snake and died. They
  reported that fact to the Exalted One.

Assuredly, monks, that monk had not suffused the four royal families of
snakes with friendly thoughts. For, monks, if that monk had suffused
the four royal families of snakes with friendly thoughts, in that case,
monks, that monk would not have been bitten by a snake and died.

What are the four royal families of snakes?

The Virūpakkhas are a royal family of snakes.

The Erāpathas are a royal family of snakes.

The Chabyāputtas are a royal family of snakes.

The Black Gotamakas are a royal family of snakes.

Assuredly, monks, that monk had not suffused the four royal families of
snakes with friendly thoughts. For, monks, if that monk had suffused
the four royal families of snakes with friendly thoughts, in that
case, monks, that monk would not have been bitten by a snake and died.

I permit you, monks, to suffuse these four royal families of snakes
with friendly thoughts; for self-preservation, for self-defense, to
effect Protection of Self. And this, monks, may be effected in the
following way:

      There is friendship ’twixt me and Virūpakkha snakes,
      There is friendship ’twixt me and Erāpatha snakes,
      There is friendship ’twixt me and Chabyāputta snakes,
      There is friendship ’twixt me and Black Gotamaka snakes.

  There is friendship ’twixt me and living beings without feet,
  There is friendship ’twixt me and living beings with two feet,
  There is friendship ’twixt me and living beings with four feet,
  There is friendship ’twixt me and living beings with many feet.

            Let no living being without feet injure me!
            Let no living being with two feet injure me!
            Let no living being with four feet injure me!
            Let no living being with many feet injure me!

    Let all creatures that live,--let all creatures that breathe,--
    Let all creatures that exist,--one and all,--
            Let all meet with prosperity!
            Let none come unto any adversity!

  Infinite is the Buddha! Infinite is the Doctrine! Infinite is the
  Order!

  Finite are creeping things,--snakes and scorpions, centipedes,
  spiders and lizards, rats and mice!

  I have wrought defense for myself!
  I have wrought protection for myself!
  Begone, living beings!
  I here do homage to the Exalted One
  And to the Seven Supreme Buddhas!


_B. Uncanonical version._

Jātaka 203: ii. 144-148.

  _There is friendship ’twixt me and Virūpakkha snakes._ This parable
  was related by the Teacher while he was in residence at Jetavana with
  reference to a certain monk.

  The story goes that while he was splitting wood at the door of the
  room where the monks took hot baths, a snake came out of a hole
  in a rotten log and bit him on the big toe. He died on the spot.
  The news of his death and of how he came to die spread throughout
  the monastery. In the Hall of Truth the monks began to discuss the
  incident: “Brethren, such-and-such a monk, they say, while splitting
  wood at the door of the room where the monks take hot baths, was
  bitten by a snake and died on the spot.”

  The Teacher drew near and inquired: “Monks, what is the subject
  that engages your attention as you sit here all gathered together?”
  “Such-and-such,” said they. “Monks,” said the Teacher, “if that monk
  had cultivated friendship for the four royal families of snakes, the
  snake would not have bitten him. For even ascetics of old, before a
  Buddha had arisen, cultivated friendship for the four royal families
  of snakes, and thus obtained deliverance from the perils that arose
  through those royal families of snakes.” So saying, he related the
  following Story of the Past:

In times past, when Brahmadatta ruled at Benāres, the Future Buddha
was reborn in the kingdom of Kāsi in the household of a Brahman. When
he reached manhood, he renounced the pleasures of sense, retired
from the world and adopted the life of an ascetic, and developed the
Supernatural Powers and the Attainments. By supernatural power, in the
region of Himavat, at a bend in the Ganges, he created a hermitage,
and there he resided, surrounded by a company of ascetics, diverting
himself with the diversions of the Trances.

At that time, on the bank of the Ganges, reptiles of various kinds
wrought such havoc among the ascetics that many of them lost their
lives. Ascetics reported that fact to the Future Buddha. The Future
Buddha caused all of the ascetics to be assembled, and said to them:
“If you would cultivate friendship for the four royal families of
snakes, the snakes would not bite you. Therefore from this time forth,
cultivate friendship for the four royal families of snakes in the
following way.” So saying, he recited this stanza:

  There is friendship ’twixt me and Virūpakkha snakes,
  There is friendship ’twixt me and Erāpatha snakes,
  There is friendship ’twixt me and Chabyāputta snakes,
  There is friendship ’twixt me and Black Gotamaka snakes.

Having thus pointed out to them the four royal families of serpents,
he said: “In case you are successful in cultivating friendship for
these, reptiles will not bite you or annoy you.” So saying, he recited
the second stanza:

  There is friendship ’twixt me and living beings without feet,
  There is friendship ’twixt me and living beings with two feet,
  There is friendship ’twixt me and living beings with four feet,
  There is friendship ’twixt me and living beings with many feet.

Having thus set forth Cultivation of Friendship in the usual form, he
next set it forth by way of prayer, reciting this stanza:

  Let no living being without feet injure me!
  Let no living being with two feet injure me!
  Let no living being with four feet injure me!
  Let no living being with many feet injure me!

Next, setting forth Cultivation of Friendship without respect of
persons, he recited this stanza:

  Let all creatures that live,--let all creatures that breathe,--
  Let all creatures that exist,--one and all,--
          Let all meet with prosperity!
          Let none come unto any adversity!

“Thus,” said he, “cultivate friendship for all living beings without
respect of persons.” Having so said, he spoke once more, to bid them
meditate on the virtues of the Three Jewels. Said he: “Infinite is the
Buddha! Infinite is the Doctrine! Infinite is the Order!”

When the Future Buddha had thus pointed out that the virtues of the
Three Jewels are infinite, he said: “Meditate on the virtues of these
Three Jewels.” Having so said, in order to point out that living
beings are finite, he continued: “Finite are creeping things,--snakes,
scorpions, centipedes, spiders, lizards, rats and mice!”

Having so said, the Future Buddha declared: “Since lust, ill-will,
and delusion, which exist in these creatures, are the qualities which
make creatures finite, therefore these creeping things are finite.”
And he said: “By the supernatural power of the Three Jewels, which
are infinite, let those of us who are finite, obtain protection for
ourselves both by night and by day.” And he said: “Thus meditate on the
virtues of the Three Jewels.” Having so said, in order to point out
what more must yet be done, he recited this stanza:

  I have wrought defense for myself!
  I have wrought protection for myself!
  Begone, living beings!
  I here do homage to the Exalted One
  And to the Seven Supreme Buddhas!

Said the Future Buddha: “In the very act of rendering homage, meditate
on the Seven Buddhas.” Thus the Future Buddha composed this protective
charm for the company of ascetics and gave it to them.

From that time on the company of ascetics, abiding steadfast in the
admonition of the Future Buddha, cultivated friendliness, meditated on
the virtues of the Buddhas. Even as they thus meditated on the virtues
of the Buddhas, all of the reptiles disappeared. As for the Future
Buddha, through the cultivation of the Exalted States, he attained the
goal of the World of Brahmā.




_19. Partridge, Monkey, and Elephant._

_Reverence your elders._


_A. Canonical version._

Vinaya ii. 161-162.

  On a certain occasion the Exalted One admonished a company of monks
  to show proper respect for their elders. Said he:

In former times, monks, on a slope of Himavat, grew a huge banyan
tree. Near it lived three friends: a partridge and a monkey and an
elephant. They lived without respect or deference for each other,
having no common life. Now, monks, to these friends occurred the
following thought: “If only we knew which one of us was the oldest, we
would respect, reverence, venerate, and honor him, and we would abide
steadfast in his admonitions.”

Accordingly, monks, the partridge and the monkey asked the elephant:
“How far back, sir, can you remember?” “Sirs, when I was a youngster, I
used to walk over this banyan tree, keeping it between my thighs; the
little tips of the shoots would just touch my belly. As far back as
that, sirs, can I remember.”

Next, monks, the partridge and the elephant asked the monkey: “How far
back, sir, can you remember?” “Sirs, when I was a youngster, I used to
sit on the ground and eat the little tips of the shoots of this banyan
tree. As far back as that, sirs, can I remember.”

Finally, monks, the monkey and the elephant asked the partridge: “How
far back, sir, can you remember?” “In yonder open space, sirs, grew a
huge banyan tree. I ate one of its fruits and dropped the seed in this
place. From that sprang this banyan tree. At that time also, sirs, I
was the oldest.”

Thereupon, monks, the monkey and the elephant said this to the
partridge: “You, sir, are our elder. You will we respect, reverence,
venerate, and honor, and in your admonitions will we abide steadfast.”

Accordingly, monks, the partridge prevailed upon the monkey and the
elephant to take upon themselves the Five Precepts, and himself also
took upon himself the Five Precepts and walked therein. They lived in
respect and deference for each other, and had a common life. After
death, upon dissolution of the body, they were reborn in a place of
bliss, in a heavenly world. This, monks, was called the Holy Life of
the Partridge.

  Men versed in the Law who honor the aged
  Have praise even in this life
  And in the next life are in bliss.


_B. Uncanonical version._

Jātaka 37: i. 217-220.

  On a certain occasion the Teacher admonished a company of monks to
  show proper respect for their elders. Said he: “In former times,
  monks, even animals reflected: ‘But it is not becoming in us that
  we should live without respect or deference for each other, having
  no common life. Let us find out which one of us is the oldest, and
  to him let us offer respectful greetings and the other marks of
  courtesy.’ And when, after diligent inquiry, they knew, ‘He is our
  elder,’ to him did they offer respectful greetings and the other
  marks of courtesy. And having so done, they departed, fulfilling the
  Path to Heaven.” So saying, he related the following Story of the
  Past:

In times past, on a slope of Himavat, near a certain huge banyan tree,
lived three friends: a partridge, a monkey, an elephant. They were
without respect or deference for each other, having no common life.
And to them occurred the following thought: “It is not proper for us
to live thus. Suppose we were to live hereafter offering respectful
greetings and the other marks of courtesy to that one of us who is the
oldest!” “But which one of us is the oldest?” they considered. “This is
the way!” said the three animals one day as they sat at the foot of the
banyan tree.

So the partridge and the monkey asked the elephant: “Master elephant,
since how long have you known this banyan tree?” He said: “Friends,
when I was a young elephant, I used to go with this banyan sapling
between my thighs. Moreover, when I stood with the tree between my
thighs, the tips of its branches used to rub against my belly. Thus I
have known this tree from the time it was a sapling.”

Next the other two animals, in the same way as before, asked the
monkey. He said: “Friends, when I was a young monkey, I used to sit
on the earth, extend my neck, and eat the tips of the shoots of this
banyan tree. Thus I have known it since it was very small.”

Finally the other two animals, in the same way as before, asked the
partridge. He said: “Friends, in former times, in such-and-such a
place, grew a huge banyan tree. I ate its fruits and dropped its seed
in this place. From that sprang this tree. Thus I know this tree from
the time when it had not yet sprouted. Therefore I am older than you.”
Thus spoke the partridge.

Thereupon the monkey and the elephant said to the wise partridge:
“Master, you are older than we. Henceforth to you will we offer
respect, reverence, veneration, salutation, and honor; to you will we
offer respectful greeting, rising on meeting, homage with joined hands,
and proper courtesy; in your admonitions will we abide steadfast. From
this time forth, therefore, be good enough to give us admonition and
needed instruction.”

From that time forth the partridge gave them admonition, established
them in the Precepts, and himself also took upon himself the Precepts.
And those three animals, established in the Precepts, showed respect
and deference for each other, and had a common life. When their life
was come to an end, they attained the goal of a heavenly world. The
taking upon themselves by these three animals of the Precepts was
called the Holy Life of the Partridge.

  “For, monks, those animals lived in respect and deference for each
  other. Why is it that you, who have retired from the world under a
  Doctrine and Discipline so well taught, do not live in respect and
  deference for each other?”

  When the Teacher had thus related this parable, he assumed the
  prerogative of One Supremely Enlightened and uttered the following
  stanza:

    Men versed in the Law who honor the aged
    Have praise even in this life
    And in the next life are in bliss.

  When the Teacher had thus extolled the practice of honoring the
  oldest, he joined the connection and identified the personages in
  the Birth-story as follows: “At that time the elephant was one of
  my disciples, the monkey was another, but the wise partridge was I
  myself.”




_20. The Hawk._

_Walk not in forbidden ground._


_A. Canonical version._

Saṁyutta v. 146-148.

  Thus have I heard: Once upon a time the Exalted One was in residence
  at Jetavana. At that time the Exalted One addressed the monks:
  “Monks!” “Reverend Sir!” replied those monks to the Exalted One. The
  Exalted One said this:

In olden times, monks, a hawk attacked a quail with violence and caught
it. Now, monks, as the hawk was carrying off the quail, the quail thus
lamented: “I am indeed unfortunate, I possess little merit,--I who
walked in forbidden ground, in a foreign region. If to-day I had walked
in my own ground, in the region of my fathers, this hawk would not have
been equal to a combat with me.”

“But, quail, what is your feeding-ground? What is the region of your
fathers?”

“A field of clods, turned up by the plow.”

Then, monks, the hawk, not exerting his strength, not asserting his
strength, released the quail. “Go, quail! Even there you will not
escape from me.” Then, monks, the quail went to the field of clods,
turned up by the plow, and mounting a big clod, stood and called the
hawk: “Come now, hawk, I dare you! Come now, hawk, I dare you!”

Then, monks, the hawk, exerting his strength, asserting his strength,
flapped both his wings and attacked the quail with violence. When,
monks, the quail knew: “This hawk is coming for me with a vengeance!”
he entered a crack in that very clod. And, monks, the hawk struck his
breast against that very clod.

  “For, monks, so it goes with whoever walks in forbidden ground, in a
  foreign region. Therefore, monks, walk not in forbidden ground, in a
  foreign region. If, monks, you walk in forbidden ground, in a foreign
  region, the Evil One will obtain entrance, the Evil One will obtain
  lodgment. And what, monks, is forbidden ground, a foreign region?
  The Five Pleasures of Sense. What are the Five? Pleasurable Sights,
  Sounds, Odors, Tastes, Contacts. And what, monks, is lawful ground,
  the region of the fathers? The Four Earnest Meditations. What are the
  Four? Meditation on the Body, on the Sensations, on the Thoughts, on
  the Conditions of Existence. Walk, monks, in lawful ground, in the
  region of the fathers. If, monks, you walk in lawful ground, in the
  region of the fathers, the Evil One will not obtain entrance, the
  Evil One will not obtain lodgment.”


_B. Uncanonical version._

Jātaka 168: ii. 58-60.

  _A hawk flying strong._ This stanza was recited by the Teacher while
  in residence at Jetavana to explain his own meaning in the Parable
  of the Bird. For one day the Teacher addressed the monks: “Walk,
  monks, in lawful ground, in the region of the fathers.” Then he
  said: “You just stay where you belong. In former times even animals,
  because they left their own ancestral region and walked in forbidden
  ground, fell into the hands of their enemies, but through their own
  intelligence and resourcefulness escaped from the hands of their
  enemies.” So saying, he related the following Story of the Past:

In times past, when Brahmadatta ruled at Benāres, the Future Buddha
was reborn as a quail, and made his home in a field of clods, turned
up by the plow. One day he said to himself: “I will seek food in a
foreign region.” So he left off seeking food in his own region and went
to the edge of a wood. Now while he was picking up food there, a hawk
saw him and attacked him with violence and caught him. As the hawk was
carrying off the quail, the quail thus lamented: “I am indeed mighty
unfortunate, I possess very little merit,--I who walked in forbidden
ground, in a foreign region. If to-day I had walked in my own ground,
in the region of my fathers, this hawk would certainly not have been
equal to coming to a combat with me.”

“But, quail, what is your feeding-ground? What is the region of your
fathers?”

“A field of clods, turned up by the plow.”

Then the hawk, not exerting his strength, released him. “Go, quail!
Even there you will not escape.” The quail went there, and mounting a
big clod, stood and cried to the hawk: “Come now, hawk!”

The hawk, exerting his strength, flapped both his wings and attacked
the quail with violence. But when the quail knew: “This hawk is coming
for me with a vengeance!” he turned and entered a crack in that very
clod. The hawk, unable to check his speed, struck his breast against
that very clod. Thus the hawk, with heart broken and eyes bulging out,
met destruction.

  When the Teacher had related this Story of the Past, he said:
  “Thus, monks, even animals, when they walk in forbidden ground,
  fall into the hands of their adversaries; but when they walk in
  their own ground, in the region of their fathers, they humble their
  adversaries. Therefore you also must not walk in forbidden ground,
  in a foreign region. If, monks, you walk in forbidden ground, in a
  foreign region, the Evil One will obtain entrance, the Evil One will
  obtain lodgment. If, monks, you walk in lawful ground, in the region
  of the fathers, the Evil One will not obtain entrance, the Evil
  One will not obtain lodgment.” Then, revealing his omniscience, he
  uttered the first stanza:

    A hawk flying strong, attacked with violence
    A quail standing in his feeding-ground, and thus met death.

Now when the hawk had thus met his death, the quail came out and
exclaimed: “I have seen the back of my enemy!” And standing on his
heart and breathing forth a solemn utterance, the quail uttered the
second stanza:

  Endowed with sense, delighting in my own feeding-ground,
  My enemy gone, I rejoice, intent on my own good.

  The Teacher, having proclaimed the Truths by the narration of this
  fable, identified the personages in the Birth-story as follows: “At
  that time the hawk was Devadatta, but the quail was I myself.”




_21. How Not To Hit an Insect._

_Better an enemy with sense than a friend without it._


_A. Boy and mosquito._

Jātaka 44: i. 246-248.

  _Better an enemy._ This parable was related by the Teacher while he
  was journeying from place to place in the country of the Magadhas, in
  a certain little village, with reference to some foolish villagers.

  The story goes that once upon a time the Teacher went from Sāvatthi
  to the kingdom of Magadha, and journeying about from place to
  place in that kingdom, arrived at a certain little village. Now
  that village was inhabited for the most part by men who were utter
  fools. There one day those utter fools of men assembled and took
  counsel together, saying: “Folks, when we enter the forest and do
  our work, the mosquitoes eat us up, and because of this our work is
  interrupted. Let us, every one, take bows and weapons, go and fight
  with the mosquitoes, pierce and cut all the mosquitoes, and thus
  make way with them.” They went to the forest with the thought in
  their minds, “We’ll pierce the mosquitoes.” But they pierced and hit
  one another and came to grief, and on their return, lay down within
  the boundaries of the village, in the village-square, and at the
  village-gate.

  The Teacher, surrounded by the Congregation of Monks, entered that
  village for alms. The rest of the inhabitants, being wise men,
  seeing the Exalted One, erected a pavilion at the village-gate,
  gave abundant alms to the Congregation of Monks presided over by
  the Buddha, saluted the Teacher, and sat down. The Teacher, seeing
  wounded men lying here and there, asked those lay disciples: “Here
  are many men who are in a bad way. What have they done?” “Reverend
  Sir, these men started out with the thought in their minds, ‘We’ll
  have a fight with the mosquitoes.’ But they pierced one another and
  returned themselves the worse for wear.” Said the Teacher: “Not only
  in their present state of existence have utter fools of men, with the
  thought in their minds, ‘We’ll hit mosquitoes,’ hit themselves; in a
  previous state of existence also they were the very men who, with the
  thought in their minds, ‘We’ll hit a mosquito,’ hit something very
  different.” Then, in response to a request of those men, he related
  the following Story of the Past:

In times past, when Brahmadatta ruled at Benāres, the Future Buddha
made his living by trading. At that time, in the kingdom of Kāsi, in
a certain frontier village, dwelt many carpenters. There a certain
grey-haired carpenter was planing a tree. Now a mosquito settled on his
head,--his head looked like the surface of a copper bowl!--and pierced
his head with his stinger, just as though he were sticking him with
a spear. Said he to his son who sat beside him: “Son, a mosquito is
stinging me on the head,--it feels just as if he were sticking me with
a spear! Shoo him away!” “Father, wait a moment! I’ll kill him with a
single blow!”

At that time the Future Buddha also, seeking wares for himself, having
reached that village, was sitting in that carpenter’s hut. Well, that
carpenter said to his son: “Shoo this mosquito off!” “I’ll shoo him
off, father!” replied the son. Taking his stand immediately behind his
father, the son, with the thought in his mind, “I’ll hit the mosquito!”
raised aloft a big, sharp axe, and split the skull of his father in
two. The carpenter died on the spot. The Future Buddha, seeing what the
son had done, thought: “Even an enemy, if he be a wise man, is better;
for an enemy, though it be from fear of human vengeance, will not
kill.” And he uttered the following stanza:

  Better an enemy with sense
  Than a friend without it,
  For with the words, “I’ll kill a mosquito!”
  A son,--both deaf and dumb!--
  Split his father’s skull!

Having uttered this stanza, the Future Buddha arose and passed away
according to his deeds. As for the carpenter, his kinsfolk did their
duty by his body.

  Said the Teacher: “Thus, lay disciples, in a previous state of
  existence also they were the very men who, with the thought in their
  minds, ‘We’ll hit a mosquito,’ hit something very different.” Having
  related this parable, he joined the connection and identified the
  personages in the Birth-story as follows: “But the wise man who
  uttered the stanza and departed on that occasion was I myself.”


_B. Girl and fly._

Jātaka 45: i. 248-249.

  _Better an enemy._ This parable was related by the Teacher while he
  was in residence at Jetavana with reference to a certain slave-girl.

  A certain wealthy merchant, we are told, had a slave-girl. Where she
  was pounding rice, her old mother came in and lay down. Flies buzzed
  round her and ate her up, just as though they were piercing her with
  needles. She said to her daughter: “My dear, the flies are eating
  me up. Shoo them off!” “I’ll shoo them off!” replied the daughter.
  Raising her pestle aloft, intending to kill the flies, with the
  thought in her mind, “I’ll make way with them!” she struck her mother
  with the pestle and killed her. When she saw what she had done, she
  began to weep: “Mother! Mother!”

  They reported that incident to the merchant. The merchant had her
  body attended to, and went to the monastery and reported the whole
  incident to the Teacher. Said the Teacher: “Verily, householder,
  not only in her present state of existence has this girl, with the
  thought in her mind, ‘I’ll kill the flies on my mother’s head!’
  struck her mother with a pestle and killed her; in a previous state
  of existence also she killed her mother in the very same way.” And in
  response to the merchant’s request, he related the following Story of
  the Past:

In times past, when Brahmadatta ruled at Benāres, the Future Buddha
was reborn in a merchant’s household, and on the death of his father,
succeeded to the post of merchant. He also had a slave-girl. She also,
when her mother came to the place where she was pounding rice and said
to her, “My dear, shoo the flies away from me!”--she also, in the very
same way, struck her mother with a pestle and killed her and began to
weep. The Future Buddha, hearing of that incident, thought: “For even
an enemy in this world, if only he be a wise man, is better!” And he
uttered the following stanza:

  Better an enemy who is intelligent
  Than a well-disposed person who is a fool!
  Look at that wretched little slave-girl!
  She killed her mother, and now,--she weeps!

With this stanza did the Future Buddha preach the Doctrine, praising
the man of wisdom.

  Said the Teacher: “Verily, householder, not only in her present state
  of existence has this girl, with the thought in her mind, ‘I’ll
  kill flies!’ caused the death of her mother; in a previous state of
  existence also she caused the death of her mother in the very same
  way.” Having related this parable, he joined the connection and
  identified the personages in the Birth-story as follows: “At that
  time that very mother was the mother, that very daughter was the
  daughter, but the wealthy merchant was I myself.”




_22. Monkey-Gardeners._

_Misdirected effort spells failure._


_A. One-stanza version._

Jātaka 46: i. 249-251.

  _Never, in the hands of one who knows not what is good._ This parable
  was related by the Teacher in a certain little village in the country
  of the Kosalas with reference to one who spoiled a garden.

  The story goes that the Teacher, while journeying from place to place
  in the country of the Kosalas, arrived at a certain little village.
  There a certain householder invited the Teacher, provided seats in
  his garden, gave alms to the Congregation of Monks presided over
  by the Buddha, and said: “Reverend Sirs, walk about in this garden
  according to your pleasure.”

  The monks arose, and accompanied by the gardener, walked about
  the garden. Seeing a certain bare spot, they asked the gardener:
  “Disciple, everywhere else this garden has dense shade, but in this
  spot there is not so much as a tree or a shrub. What, pray, is the
  reason for this?” “Reverend Sirs, when this garden was planted, a
  certain village boy watered it. In this spot he pulled up the young
  trees by the roots, and according as the roots were large or small,
  watered them plentifully or sparingly. Those young trees withered and
  died. That’s how this spot comes to be so bare!”

  The monks approached the Teacher and reported that matter to him.
  Said the Teacher: “Not only in his present state of existence has
  that village boy spoiled a garden; in a previous state of existence
  also he did naught but spoil a garden.” So saying, he related the
  following Story of the Past:

In times past, when Brahmadatta ruled at Benāres, a holiday was
proclaimed. From the moment they heard the holiday drum, the residents
of the entire city went about making holiday.

At that time many monkeys lived in the king’s garden. The gardener
thought: “A holiday has been proclaimed in the city. I’ll tell
these monkeys to water the garden, and then I’ll go make holiday.”
Approaching the leader of the monkeys, he said: “Master monkey-leader,
this garden is of great use even to you. Here you eat flowers and
fruits and shoots. A holiday has been proclaimed in the city. I’m going
to make holiday.” And he asked him the question: “Can you water the
young trees in this garden until I come back?” “Yes, indeed, I’ll water
them.” “Very well,” said the gardener; “be heedful.” So saying, he gave
those monkeys water-skins and wooden water-pots to use in watering
the trees, and departed. The monkeys took the water-skins and wooden
water-pots and watered the young trees.

[Illustration: “_When you water the young trees, pull them up by the
roots, every one._”]

Now the leader of the monkeys said to the monkeys: “Master-monkeys, the
water must not be wasted. When you water the young trees, pull them
up by the roots, every one; look at the roots; water plentifully
the roots that strike deep, but sparingly the roots that do not strike
deep; later on we shall have a hard time getting water.” “Very well,”
said the monkeys, promising to do as he told them to. And they did so.

At that time a certain wise man saw those monkeys working away in the
king’s garden, and said to them: “Master-monkeys, why are you pulling
up by the roots every one of those young trees and watering them
plentifully or sparingly according as the roots are large or small?”
The monkeys replied: “That’s what the monkey who is our leader told
us to do.” When the wise man heard that reply, he thought: “Alas!
alas! Those that are fools, those that lack wisdom, say to themselves:
‘We’ll do good.’ But harm’s the only thing they do!” And he uttered the
following stanza:

  Never, in the hands of one who knows not what is good,
  Does a good undertaking turn out happily.
  A man who lacks intelligence spoils what is good
  Like the monkey who worked in the garden.

Thus, with this stanza, did that wise man censure the leader of the
monkeys. Having so done, he departed from the garden with his followers.

  Said the Teacher: “Not only in his present state of existence has
  that village boy spoiled a garden; in a previous state of existence
  also he did naught but spoil a garden.” Having related this parable,
  he joined the connection and identified the personages in the
  Birth-story as follows: “At that time the leader of the monkeys was
  the village boy who spoiled a garden, but the wise man was I myself.”


_B. Three-stanza version._

Jātaka 268: ii. 345-347.

  _If the monkey considered the best of the crowd._ This parable was
  related by the Teacher in the South Mountain region with reference to
  a certain gardener’s son.

  The story goes that the Teacher, after keeping residence for the
  period of the rains, departed from Jetavana and journeyed from place
  to place in the South Mountain region. Now a certain lay disciple
  invited the Congregation of Monks presided over by the Buddha,
  provided seats in his garden, delighted them with rice-gruel and hard
  food, and said: “Noble sirs, if you desire to take a walk about the
  garden, go with this gardener.” And he gave orders to the gardener:
  “Pray give the noble monks fruits and other such-like edibles.”

  As the monks walked about, they saw a certain cleared space, and
  asked: “This space is cleared, without growing trees; what, pray, is
  the reason for this?” Then the gardener told them: “The story goes
  that a certain gardener’s son once watered the saplings. ‘I’ll water
  them plentifully or sparingly according as the roots are large or
  small,’ thought he. So he pulled them up by the roots and watered
  them plentifully or sparingly according as the roots were large or
  small. That’s how this space comes to be cleared!”

  The monks went to the Teacher and reported that matter to him. Said
  the Teacher: “Not only in his present state of existence has that
  youth spoiled a garden; in a previous state of existence also he did
  naught but spoil a garden.” So saying, he related the following Story
  of the Past:

In times past, when Vissasena ruled at Benāres, a holiday was
proclaimed. Thought the gardener: “I’ll go make holiday;” and said
to the monkeys who lived in the garden: “This garden is of great use
to you. I’m going to make holiday for seven days. You must water the
saplings on the seventh day.” “Very well,” said they, consenting. He
gave them little water-skins and departed.

The monkeys did as they were told and watered the saplings. Now the
leader of the monkeys said to the monkeys: “Wait a moment! Water is at
all times hard to get; it must not be wasted. What you must do is to
pull up the saplings by the roots, note the length of the roots, water
plentifully the saplings that have long roots, but sparingly those
that have short roots.” “Very well,” said the monkeys, and went about
watering the saplings, some of them pulling the saplings up by the
roots and others planting them again.

At that time the Future Buddha was the son of a certain notable in
Benāres. Having occasion, for some purpose or other, to go to the
garden, he saw those monkeys working away, and asked them: “Who told
you to do this?” “The monkey who is our leader.” “Well! if this is the
wisdom of your leader, what must yours be like!” And explaining the
matter, he uttered the first stanza:

  If the monkey considered the best of the crowd
  Has wisdom like this,
  Then what in the world must the others be like?

Hearing this remark, the monkeys uttered the second stanza:

  Brahman, you don’t know what you are talking about
  When you blame us like this;
  For how, unless we see the roots,
  Can we know whether the tree stands firm?

Hearing their reply, the Future Buddha uttered the third stanza:

  It isn’t you I blame,--not I,--
  Nor the other monkeys in the wood;
  Vissasena alone is the one to blame,
  Who asked you to tend his trees for him.

  When the Teacher had related this parable, he identified the
  personages in the Birth-story as follows: “At that time the leader of
  the monkeys was the youth who spoiled the garden, but the wise man
  was I myself.”




_23. Two Dicers._

_Take care!_


_A. Canonical version._

Dīgha ii. 348-349.

In olden times two dicers played at dice. The first dicer swallowed
every ace. The second dicer saw that dicer swallow every ace. Seeing,
he said this to that dicer: “You, sir, have it all your own way. Give
me the dice, sir; I must hurry away.” “Yes, sir,” said that dicer, and
handed over the dice to that dicer.

Now that dicer painted the dice with poison, and said this to that
dicer: “Come, sir, let us play at dice.” “Yes, sir,” said that dicer in
assent to that dicer.

A second time also those dicers played at dice; a second time also that
dicer swallowed every ace. The second dicer saw that dicer swallow for
the second time also every ace. Seeing, he said this to that dicer:

  Smeared with the strongest poison
  Was the die the man swallowed, but knew it not.
  Swallow, O swallow, wicked dicer!
  Later it will taste bitter to you.


_B. Uncanonical version._

Jātaka 91: i. 379-380.

  On a certain occasion the Exalted One reproved the monks for handling
  their property carelessly. Said he: “Monks, careless handling of
  property is like careless handling of deadly poison. For men of old,
  through carelessness, not knowing what was the matter, ate poison,
  and as a result experienced great suffering.” So saying, he related
  the following Story of the Past:

In times past, when Brahmadatta ruled at Benāres, the Future Buddha
was reborn in a household of great wealth. When he reached manhood, he
became a dicer. Now a second dicer used to play with the Future Buddha,
and he was a cheat. So long as he was winning, he would not break the
play-ring; but when he lost, he would put a die in his mouth, say, “A
die is lost!” break the play-ring, and make off.

The Future Buddha, knowing the reason for this, said: “Let be! I shall
find some way of dealing with him.” So taking the dice to his own home,
he painted them with deadly poison and let them dry thoroughly. Then,
taking them with him, he went to the second dicer’s and said: “Come,
sir, let us play at dice.” “Yes, sir,” said the second dicer, and
marked out the play-ring.

As the second dicer played with the Future Buddha, he lost, and put a
die in his month. Now the Future Buddha, seeing him do this, said:
“Just swallow! Later you will know what that is.” And to rebuke him he
recited the following stanza:

  Smeared with the strongest poison
  Was the die the man swallowed, but knew it not.
  Swallow, O swallow, wicked dicer!
  Later it will taste bitter to you.

Even as the Future Buddha spoke, he swooned from the effect of the
poison, rolled his eyes, dropped his shoulders, and fell. Said the
Future Buddha: “Now I must grant him his life.” So giving him an emetic
containing herbs, he made him vomit. Then, giving him ghee, honey, and
sugar to eat, he made him well. Finally he admonished him: “Never do
such a thing again.” And having performed alms-giving and the other
works of merit, the Future Buddha passed away according to his deeds.

  When the Teacher had completed this parable, he said: “Monks,
  careless handling of property is like careless handling of deadly
  poison.” Then he identified the personages in the Birth-story as
  follows: “At that time the wise dicer was I myself.”




_24. Two Caravan-Leaders._

_Be prudent!_


_A. Canonical version._

Dīgha ii. 342-346.

In olden times a great caravan of a thousand carts went from the
eastern country to the western country. Wherever it went, very quickly
were consumed grass, sticks, water, and pot-herbs. Now over that
caravan were two caravan-leaders, one over five hundred carts, one over
five hundred carts. And to these caravan-leaders occurred the following
thought: “This is a great caravan of a thousand carts. Wherever we go,
very quickly are consumed grass, sticks, water, and pot-herbs. Suppose
we were to divide this caravan into two caravans of five hundred carts
each!” They divided that caravan into two caravans, one of five hundred
carts, one of five hundred carts. One caravan-leader only loaded his
carts with abundant grass and sticks and water, and started his caravan
forward.

Now when he had proceeded a journey of two or three days, that
caravan-leader saw coming in the opposite direction in a chariot drawn
by asses, a black man with bloodshot eyes, with ungirt quiver, wearing
a garland of lilies, his garments wet, the hair of his head wet, the
wheels of his chariot smeared with mud. Seeing, he said this: “Whence,
sir, do you come?” “From such-and-such a country.” “Whither do you
intend to go?” “To such-and-such a country.” “Evidently, sir, farther
on in the wilderness a heavy rain has been in progress.” “Yes, indeed,
sir. Farther on in the wilderness a heavy rain has been in progress.
The roads are drenched with water; abundant are grass and sticks and
water. Throw away, sir, the old grass, sticks, and water; with lightly
burdened carts go ever so quickly; do not overburden the conveyances.”

Now that caravan-leader told his drivers what that man had said, and
gave orders as follows: “Throw away the old grass, sticks, and water;
with lightly burdened carts start the caravan forward.” “Yes, sir,”
said those drivers to that caravan-leader. And in obedience to his
command they threw away the old grass, sticks, and water, and with
lightly burdened carts started the caravan forward. Neither in the
first stage of the journey, nor in the second, nor in the third, nor in
the fourth, nor in the fifth, nor in the sixth, nor in the seventh, did
they see grass or sticks or water; they all met destruction and death.
And all that were in that caravan, whether men or beasts, did that
ogre, that demon, devour, leaving only the bare bones.

When the second caravan-leader knew, “It is now a long time since
that caravan started out,” he loaded his carts with abundant grass
and sticks and water, and started his caravan forward. Now when he
had proceeded a journey of two or three days, this caravan-leader
saw coming in the opposite direction in a chariot drawn by asses, a
black man with bloodshot eyes, with ungirt quiver, wearing a garland
of lilies, his garments wet, the hair of his head wet, the wheels of
his chariot smeared with mud. Seeing, he said this: “Whence, sir, do
you come?” “From such-and-such a country.” “Whither do you intend
to go?” “To such-and-such a country.” “Evidently, sir, farther on
in the wilderness a heavy rain has been in progress.” “Yes, indeed,
sir. Farther on in the wilderness a heavy rain has been in progress.
The roads are drenched with water; abundant are grass and sticks and
water. Throw away, sir, the old grass, sticks, and water; with lightly
burdened carts go ever so quickly; do not overburden the conveyances.”

Now that caravan-leader told his drivers what that man had said,
adding: “This man surely is no friend of ours, no kinsman or
blood-relative. How can we trust him on our journey? On no account
must the old grass, sticks, and water, be thrown away. Start the
caravan forward, leaving the things just as they are. I will not
permit you to throw away the old.” “Yes, sir,” said those drivers to
that caravan-leader. And in obedience to his command they started the
caravan forward, leaving the things just as they were. Neither in the
first stage of the journey, nor in the second, nor in the third, nor
in the fourth, nor in the fifth, nor in the sixth, nor in the seventh,
did they see grass or sticks or water; but they saw that caravan in
destruction and ruin. And of those that were in that caravan, whether
men or beasts, they saw only the bare bones, for they had been eaten by
that ogre, by that demon.

Thereupon that caravan-leader addressed his drivers: “This caravan
here met destruction and ruin solely through the folly of that foolish
caravan-leader who acted as its guide. Now then, throw away those wares
in our own caravan which are of little worth, and take those wares in
this other caravan which are of great worth.” “Yes, sir,” said those
drivers to that caravan-leader. And in obedience to his command they
threw away all those wares in their own caravan which were of little
worth, and took those wares in that other caravan which were of great
worth. And they passed in safety through that wilderness solely
through the wisdom of that wise caravan-leader who acted as their guide.


_B. Uncanonical version._

Jātaka 1: i. 95-106.

  One day a wealthy merchant, accompanied by five hundred disciples of
  heretical teachers, went to Jetavana monastery, saluted the Exalted
  One, presented offerings, and sat down. Likewise did those disciples
  of heretical teachers salute the Teacher and sit down, close beside
  the merchant. And they gazed at the countenance of the Teacher,
  resplendent with the glory of the full moon; at his form, a form like
  that of Great Brahmā, adorned with the greater and lesser marks of
  beauty, encircled with a radiance a fathom deep; at the solid rays
  of a Buddha which issued from his body, forming, as it were, garland
  after garland and pair after pair.

  And to them the Teacher, as it were a young lion roaring the lion’s
  roar on a table-land in the Himālaya mountains, as it were a cloud
  thundering in the rainy season, as it were bringing down the Heavenly
  Ganges, as it were weaving a rope of jewels, with a voice like that
  of Great Brahmā, endowed with the Eight Excellences, captivating
  the ear, delighting the heart, preached a pleasing discourse on the
  Doctrine, diversified in divers ways.

  The heretics, after listening to the discourse of the Teacher,
  believed in their hearts, and rising from their seats, burst asunder
  the refuge of the heretical teachers and sought refuge in the Buddha.
  From that time on they regularly accompanied the merchant to the
  monastery with offerings, listened to the Doctrine, gave alms, kept
  the Precepts, observed Fast-day. Now the Exalted One departed from
  Sāvatthi and went back again to Rājagaha. When the Teacher departed,
  the heretics burst that refuge asunder, sought refuge once more in
  the heretical teachers, lapsed once more into their former position.

  When the Exalted One returned to Sāvatthi and learned what had
  happened, he said to those backsliders: “Laymen, in former times also
  men mistook for a refuge what was no refuge at all, grasped with the
  grasp of reason, with the grasp of contradiction, and in a wilderness
  haunted by demons came to a sorry end, becoming the food of ogres.
  But men who laid hold of Truth absolute, certain, consistent,
  obtained safety in that very wilderness.” Having so said, he became
  silent.

  Thereupon the merchant, rising from his seat, saluted and applauded
  the Exalted One. And joining his hands and pressing them to his head
  in token of reverent salutation, he spoke as follows: “Reverend
  Sir, it is clear to us that these laymen just now burst asunder the
  Supreme Refuge and chose instead speculation. But the fact that
  in former times, in a wilderness haunted by demons, men who chose
  speculation were destroyed, while men who chose Absolute Truth were
  saved,--that fact is hidden from us and clear to you alone. It were
  indeed well were the Exalted One, as it were making the full moon
  rise in the heavens, to make this fact clear to us.”

  Then the Exalted One aroused the attention of the merchant by saying:
  “I, O householder, fulfilled the Ten Perfections during a period of
  time which cannot be measured, and penetrated Omniscience, for the
  sole purpose of rending asunder the doubt of the world. Lend ear and
  listen as attentively as though you were filling a golden tube with
  lion-marrow.” Thereupon, as it were cleaving the Vault of the Snow
  and releasing the full moon, he revealed circumstances hidden by
  rebirth:

In times past, in the kingdom of Kāsi, in the city of Benāres, there
was a king named Brahmadatta. At that time the Future Buddha was
reborn in the household of a caravan-leader. In the course of time
he grew to manhood, and went about trading with five hundred carts.
Sometimes he went from east to west, sometimes from west to east. In
the same city of Benāres there was another caravan-leader besides, a
foolish, short-sighted, resourceless fellow.

At that time the Future Buddha took a valuable lot of goods from
Benāres, filled five hundred carts, made preparations for the journey,
and was all ready to start. Likewise that foolish caravan-leader also
filled five hundred carts, made preparations for the journey, and was
all ready to start.

The Future Buddha thought: “If this foolish caravan-leader goes at the
same time I go, and a thousand carts travel along the road together,
even the road will not be big enough. It will be difficult for the men
to find firewood and water, and difficult for the oxen to find grass.
Either he or I should go first.” So he had the man summoned, told him
the situation, and said: “It is out of the question for both of us to
go at the same time. Will you go first, or follow after?”

Thought the foolish caravan-leader: “There are many advantages in my
going first. There will not be a single rut in the road over which I
travel; my oxen will eat grass which has not been touched; my men will
have leaves for curry which have not been touched; the water will be
clear; I can sell my goods at whatever price I choose to set.” So he
said: “I, sir, will go first.”

As for the Future Buddha, he saw many advantages in going second, for
the following considerations presented themselves to his mind: “Those
who go first will make smooth the rough spots on the road; I shall go
by the same road they have gone; the oxen that go first will eat the
old tough grass, and my oxen will eat the fresh grass which will have
sprung up in the meantime; wherever they pluck leaves, fresh leaves
for curry will have sprung up and will be at the disposal of my men;
in places where there is no water, they will dig wells and obtain a
supply, and we shall drink water from wells dug by others. Moreover,
price-fixing is like depriving men of life! If I go second, I can sell
my goods for whatever price they have fixed.” Accordingly, seeing all
these advantages in going second, he said: “You, sir, go first.” “Very
well, sir,” said the foolish caravan-leader. So harnessing his carts,
he set out, and in due course passing beyond the habitations of men, he
reached the mouth of the wilderness.

(Wildernesses are of five kinds: robber-wildernesses, beast-wildernesses,
waterless wildernesses, demon-wildernesses, famine-wildernesses. Where
the road is infested with robbers, it is called a robber-wilderness.
Where the road is infested with lions and other beasts of prey, it
is called a beast-wilderness. Where there is no water for bathing or
drinking, it is called a waterless wilderness. If it is infested with
demons, it is called a demon-wilderness. If it lacks roots and hard
food and soft food, it is called a famine-wilderness. Of these five
kinds of wildernesses, this wilderness was both a waterless wilderness
and a demon-wilderness.)

Therefore that caravan-leader set many huge chatties in the carts and
had them filled with water before he struck into the sixty-league
wilderness. Now when he reached the middle of the wilderness, the
ogre who lived in the wilderness, thinking, “I will make these men
throw away the water they took,” created a car to delight the heart,
drawn by pure white young oxen; and surrounded by ten or twelve demons
bearing in their hands bow, quiver, shield, and weapon, decked with
water-lilies both blue and white, head wet, garments wet, seated in
that car like a very lord, the wheels of the car smeared with mud, came
down that road from the opposite direction.

Both before him and behind him marched the demons who formed his
retinue, heads wet, garments wet, decked with garlands of water-lilies
both blue and white, carrying in their hands clusters of lotus-flowers
both red and white, chewing the fibrous stalks of water-lilies,
streaming with drops of water and mud.

Now caravan-leaders, when the wind is ahead, to avoid the dust, ride
in front, sitting in their cars, surrounded by their attendants. When
it blows from behind, they ride behind in precisely the same way. But
at this time the wind was ahead; therefore that caravan-leader rode in
front.

When the ogre saw him approaching, he caused his own car to turn out
of the road and greeted him in a friendly manner, saying: “Where are
you going?” The caravan-leader also caused his own car to turn out of
the road, allowing room for the carts to pass, and standing aside,
said to that ogre: “We, sir, are just approaching from Benāres. But
you are approaching decked with water-lilies both blue and white, with
lotus-flowers both red and white in your hands, chewing the fibrous
stalks of water-lilies, smeared with mud, with drops of water streaming
from you. Is it raining along the road by which you came? Are the
lakes completely covered with water-lilies both blue and white, and
lotus-flowers both red and white?”

When the ogre heard his words, he said: “Friend, what’s this you’re
saying? Do you see that dark green streak of woods? Beyond that
point the entire forest is one mass of water; it rains all the time;
the hollows are full of water; in this place and in that are lakes
completely covered with lotus-flowers both red and white.” As the carts
passed, one after another, he inquired: “Where are you going with these
carts?” “To such-and-such a country.” “What are the goods you have in
this cart,--and in that?” “Such-and-such.”

“The cart that approaches last moves as though it were excessively
heavy; what goods have you in that?” “There is water in that.” “In
bringing water thus far, of course, you have acted wisely. But beyond
this point you have no occasion to carry water. Ahead of you water is
abundant. Break the chatties to pieces, throw away the water, travel
at ease.” And having so said, he added: “You continue your journey;
we have some business that detains us.” The ogre went a little way,
and when he was out of their sight, went back again to his own city of
ogres.

Now that foolish caravan-leader, out of his own foolishness, took the
advice of the ogre, broke the chatties to pieces, threw away all of the
water, leaving not so much as a dribble, and caused the carts to move
forward. Ahead there was not the slightest particle of water. For lack
of water to drink the men grew weary. They traveled until sundown,
and then unharnessed the carts, drew them up in a contracted circle,
and tied the oxen to the wheels. There was neither water for the oxen
nor gruel and boiled rice for the men. The weakened men lay down here
and there and went to sleep. At midnight the ogres approached from the
city of ogres, slew both oxen and men, every one, devoured their flesh,
leaving only the bare bones, and having so done, departed. Thus, by
reason of a single foolish caravan-leader, they all met destruction.
The bones of their hands and all their other bones lay scattered about
in the four directions and the four intermediate directions; five
hundred carts stood as full as ever.

As for the Future Buddha, he waited for a month and a half from the
day when the foolish caravan-leader set out, and then set out from
the city with five hundred carts. In due course he reached the mouth
of the wilderness. There he had the water-chatties filled, putting in
an abundant supply of water. Then, sending a drum around the camp, he
assembled his men and spoke as follows: “Without first obtaining my
permission, you must not use so much as a dribble of water. In the
wilderness there are poison-trees: any leaf or flower or fruit which
you have not previously eaten, you must not eat without first obtaining
my permission.” Having thus admonished his men, he struck into the
wilderness with his five hundred carts.

When he reached the middle of the wilderness, that ogre showed himself
in the path of the Future Buddha in precisely the same way as before.
When the Future Buddha saw him, he knew: “In this wilderness is no
water; that is what is called a waterless wilderness. Moreover this
fellow is fearless, red-eyed, casts no shadow. Without a doubt this
fellow caused the foolish caravan-leader who went first to throw away
all his water, and having thus brought weariness upon him and his
company, devoured them. But, unless I am mistaken, he does not know how
wise and resourceful I am.”

Accordingly the Future Buddha said to the ogre: “You go your way. We
are traders. Unless we see water farther on, we shall not throw away
the water we have brought. But wherever we do see water, there we shall
throw away the water we have brought, and having thus lightened our
carts, shall continue our journey.” The ogre went a little way, and
when he was out of sight, went back again to his own city of ogres.

Now when the ogre had gone, the men asked the Future Buddha: “Noble
sir, these men said: ‘Do you see that dark green streak of woods?
Beyond that point it rains all the time.’ And the men who said it
approached garlanded with garlands of water-lilies both blue and white,
carrying clusters of lotus-flowers both red and white, chewing the
fibrous stalks of water-lilies, heads wet, garments wet, with drops of
water streaming from them. Let us throw away the water and go quickly
with lightened carts.”

The Future Buddha, hearing their words, caused the carts to halt,
assembled all of his men, and asked: “Has any one of you heard that
there is either a lake or a pool in this wilderness?” “Noble sir, we
have not so heard. This is what is called a waterless wilderness.”
“Just now some men said: ‘Beyond that dark green streak of woods it is
raining.’ Now how far does a rain-wind blow?” “A matter of a league,
noble sir.” “But has a rain-wind touched the body of even a single
one of you?” “It has not, noble sir.” “How far off is a cloud-head
visible?” “A matter of a league, noble sir.” “But has any one of you
seen even a single cloud-head?” “We have not, noble sir.” “How far off
is lightning visible?” “Four or five leagues, noble sir.” “But has
any one of you seen a flash of lightning?” “We have not, noble sir.”
“How far off can the sound of a cloud be heard?” “A matter of one or
two leagues, noble sir.” “But has any one of you heard the sound of a
cloud?” “We have not, noble sir.”

“Those are not human beings; those are ogres. They must have come with
the thought in their minds: ‘We will make these men throw away their
water, weaken them, and devour them.’ The foolish caravan-leader who
went first was not resourceful. Undoubtedly he must have thrown away
the water at their behest, grown weary, and been devoured; the five
hundred carts must stand as full as ever. To-day we shall see them. Do
not throw away even so much as a dribble of water, but drive ahead as
fast as ever you can.” With these words he bade them drive forward.

Proceeding, he saw the five hundred carts as full as ever, and the
bones of the men’s hands and all their other bones scattered in all
directions. He had the carts unharnessed and a stockade built by
drawing them into a contracted circle. He had both men and oxen given
their supper betimes, and the oxen lie down in the centre of the circle
formed by the men. He himself, assisted by the leaders of the force,
kept watch during the three watches of the night, sword in hand, and
allowed the dawn to rise upon him standing there.

On the following day, very early in the morning, he had his men do all
their chores, feed the oxen, discard the weak carts, substitute strong
ones, throw away goods of little value, substitute those of great
value. And going to the place where he would be, he sold his goods for
twice or thrice the price, and together with his entire company went
back again to his own city.

  When the Teacher had related this parable, he said: “Thus,
  householder, in times past those who grasped with the grasp of
  speculation came to a sorry end, but those who grasped Absolute Truth
  escaped from the hands of demons, went in safety to the place where
  they would be, and went back again to their own place.” And having
  thus joined the two parts of this Parable of Absolute Truth, he, the
  Supremely Enlightened, uttered the following stanza:

    Some adhered to Absolute Truth, sophists to less than this.
    Knowing this, a wise man should lay hold on Absolute Truth.

  Said the Teacher in conclusion: “At that time the wise caravan-leader
  was I myself.”




_25. Boar and Lion._

“_Eat me, O lion!_”

Adapted from C. H. Tawney, Ocean of the Streams of Story
(Kathāsaritsāgara), Chapter 72.


In times past there dwelt in a cave in the Vindhya mountains a wise
boar, who was none other than the Buddha in a previous state of
existence, and with him his friend a monkey. He was compassionate
towards all living beings. One day there came to his cave a lion and
a lioness and their cub. And the lion said to his mate: “Since the
rains have hindered the movements of all living beings, we shall of a
certainty perish for lack of some animal to eat.” And the lioness said:
“Of a certainty one or another of us is destined to die of hunger.
Therefore do you and the cub eat me, for thus you will save your lives!
Are you not my lord and master? Can you not get another mate like me?
Therefore do you and the cub eat me, for thus you will save your lives!”

Now at that moment the wise boar awoke, and hearing the words of the
lioness, was delighted, and thought to himself: “This is the fruit of
the merit which I have acquired in previous states of existence. I will
satisfy the hunger of my friends with my own body and blood.” Then the
wise boar arose from his bed and went out of his cave and said to the
lion: “My good friend, do not despair. For here I am, ready to be eaten
by you and your mate and your cub. Eat me, O lion!” Now when the lion
heard these words, he was delighted, and said to his mate: “Let our cub
eat first; then I will eat, and you shall eat after me.” The lioness
agreed.

So first the cub ate some of the flesh of the wise boar, and then the
lion began to eat. And while he was eating, the wise boar said to him:
“Be quick and drink my blood before it sinks into the ground, and
satisfy your hunger with my flesh, and let your mate eat what is left.”
So the lion gradually devoured the flesh until only the bones were
left. But--wonderful to relate!--the wise boar did not die, for his
life remained in him, as if to see how long his endurance would endure.
In the meantime the lioness died of hunger in the cave, and the lion
went off somewhere or other with his cub, and so the night came to an
end.

Then the monkey awoke and went out of the cave, and seeing the wise
boar reduced to a heap of bones, became greatly excited and exclaimed:
“What reduced you to a heap of bones? Tell me, O friend, if you
can.” So the wise boar told him the whole story. Then the monkey did
reverence to the wise boar, and said to him: “Tell me what you wish me
to do, and I will do it.” The wise boar replied: “I wish only to have
my body restored to me like as it was before, and to have the lioness
that died of hunger restored to life again, that she may satisfy her
hunger with my body and blood.” Thereupon, as the fruit of the merit
which the wise boar had acquired, he was transformed into a sage, and
the monkey into a sage likewise.




_26. Fairy-Prince and Griffin._

“_Eat me, O griffin!_”

Adapted from C. H. Tawney, Ocean of the Streams of Story
(Kathāsaritsāgara), Chapters 22 and 90.


On a ridge of the Himālaya stands a city called the Golden City, for it
gleams from afar like the rays of the sun. And in that city, once upon
a time, lived the king of the fairies, and his name was Jīmūta-ketu.
And in the garden of his palace grew a wishing-tree, and its name
was Granter of Desires, for it granted all desires. By the favor of
that tree the king obtained a son, who was none other than the Future
Buddha, and his name was Jīmūta-vāhana. He was valiant in generosity,
of mighty courage, and compassionate towards all living beings.

When Jīmūta-vāhana was become of age, his father made him crown-prince.
Thus did he become the fairy-prince. And when he had become the
fairy-prince, the ministers of the kingdom came to him and said: “O
fairy-prince, do reverence always to this wishing-tree, for it grants
all desires, and cannot be resisted by any living creature. For so
long as we possess this tree, we cannot suffer injury of any kind from
anyone, even from Indra, king of the gods, much less from any other.”

When Jīmūta-vāhana heard these words, he thought to himself: “Alas!
our forefathers, for all their possession of this noble tree, obtained
by the favor of this tree naught but wealth and victory over their
enemies; thus did they demean themselves, and thus did they demean
this tree likewise. For no such purposes as these will I employ this
tree. For I know that the good things of this world endure but for a
short while, and then perish and vanish utterly. But friendliness and
compassion and generosity towards all living beings yield abundant
fruit, both in this world and in the next. As for wealth, if it be
not used for the benefit of others, it is like lightning which for an
instant stings the eye, and then flickers and vanishes. Therefore if
this wishing-tree which we possess, and which grants all desires, be
employed for the benefit of others, we shall reap from it all the fruit
that it can give. Accordingly I will so act that by the wealth of this
tree all living beings shall be delivered from poverty and distress.”

Then Jīmūta-vāhana went to the wishing-tree and said: “O tree-spirit,
thou that dost grant to us the fruit that we desire, fulfil to-day this
one wish of mine: Deliver all living beings from poverty and distress.”
Straightway--wonderful to relate!--the wishing-tree showered a shower
of gold upon the earth, and all living beings rejoiced thereat and
became well-disposed to Jīmūta-vāhana, and the fame and glory of him
spread both near and far. But the relatives of Jīmūta-ketu, seeing
that his throne was firmly established by the glory of his son, were
moved to jealousy and became hostile to him. And because the kingdom of
Jīmūta-ketu was weak, they determined to attack it and overthrow it,
and to take possession of the wishing-tree that granted all desires.
And they assembled and met together and began preparations to attack
the kingdom of Jīmūta-ketu and to overthrow it and to take possession
of the wishing-tree that granted all desires.

Thereupon Jīmūta-vāhana the fairy-prince said to Jīmūta-ketu the
fairy-king his father: “Why should we seek to obtain new wealth, or
to retain the wealth that we possess? Is not this body of ours like a
bubble in the water, which bursts in an instant and vanishes? Is it not
like a candle, which, when it is exposed to the wind, flickers for an
instant and goes out? Should a wise man desire to obtain wealth or to
retain it when it is obtained, by the killing of living beings? I will
not fight with my relatives. Therefore I will leave my kingdom and go
to some forest-hermitage. Let these miserable wretches do as they like,
but let us not kill the members of our own family.”

And Jīmūta-ketu the fairy-king said to Jīmūta-vāhana the fairy-prince
his son: “Then will I too go, my son. For what desire for rule can I
have, who am old, when you, who are young, out of compassion towards
all living beings, abandon your kingdom as though it were so much straw
and stubble?” Thereupon Jīmūta-vāhana, with his father and mother, went
to the Malaya mountain, and took up his abode in a forest-hermitage,
the dwelling of the fairy-magicians, the Siddhas, where the brooks were
hidden by the sandalwood trees, and devoted himself to the care of his
father and mother.

One day, as he was roaming about with a companion, he came to a wood on
the shore of the sea. There he saw many heaps of bones. And he said to
his companion: “Whose bones are these?” His companion replied: “Give
ear, and I will tell you the story in a few words.”


_Griffin and snakes._

In times past Kadrū and Vinatā, the two wives of Kashyapa, had a
quarrel. Kadrū said that the horses of the Sun were black, and Vinatā
said that they were white, and they made a wager that whichever of the
two was wrong should become a slave of the other. Then Kadrū, bent on
winning, actually induced her sons the snakes to defile the horses of
the Sun by spitting venom over them; and showing them to Vinatā thus
defiled, she conquered her by a trick and made her her slave.

When the griffin, the son of Vinatā, heard of that, he came and tried
to induce Kadrū to release Vinatā from slavery. Then the snakes, the
sons of Kadrū, said to the griffin, the son of Vinatā: “O griffin,
the gods have begun to churn the sea of milk. Fetch thence the drink
of immortality and give it to us as a substitute, and then take your
mother away with you.” When the griffin heard these words, he went to
the sea of milk and displayed his mighty prowess in order to obtain
the drink of immortality. Then the god Vishnu, pleased with his mighty
prowess, condescended to say to him: “I am pleased with thee; choose
some boon.” Then the griffin, angry because his mother had been made
a slave, asked the following boon of Vishnu: “May the snakes become
my food!” Vishnu granted him this boon. Now Indra, king of the gods,
listened to the conversation, and when the griffin, by his mighty
prowess, had obtained the drink of immortality, he said to him: “O
griffin, take steps to prevent the foolish snakes from consuming the
drink of immortality, and to enable me to take it away from them
again.” The griffin agreed, and elated by the boon of Vishnu, he went
to the snakes with the vessel containing the drink of immortality.

And he called out from afar to the snakes: “To you have I brought the
drink of immortality. Take it, and release my mother. But if you are
afraid, I will put it on a bed of darbha-grass. So soon as my mother is
released, I will go; therefore take the drink of immortality thence.”
Now the snakes were terrified by reason of the boon which Vishnu had
granted to the griffin, and at once agreed to the bargain. Then the
griffin set on a bed of darbha-grass the vessel containing the drink of
immortality, and the snakes released his mother from slavery, and the
griffin departed with her.

But while the snakes, not suspicious of a ruse, were in the very act
of taking the drink of immortality, Indra, king of the gods, suddenly
swooped down, and confounding them with his mighty prowess, carried
off the vessel containing the drink of immortality. Then the snakes in
despair licked the bed of darbha-grass with their tongues, thinking
that there might be so much as a drop of the drink of immortality spilt
thereon; whereupon--wonderful to relate--their tongues became split,
and they became double-tongued for nothing.

Thus did the snakes fail to obtain the drink of immortality. And
straightway their enemy the griffin, relying on the boon which he had
obtained from Vishnu, swooped down on them and began to devour them.
And this he did again and again. And he wrought such havoc among them
that the snakes in Pātāla were nigh unto death from sheer fright, and
their females miscarried, and the whole race of the snakes was nigh
unto utter destruction. Then Vāsuki, king of the snakes, fearing that
the whole race of the snakes would be rooted out, begged the griffin
to relent, and made the following agreement with him: “O king of
birds, every day, on the hill that rises out of the sand of the sea,
I will send you a single snake to eat. But you must not commit the
folly of entering Pātāla, for by destroying utterly the whole race
of the snakes, you will only defeat your own purpose.” The griffin
consented. So every day, on the hill that rises out of the sand of the
sea, Vāsuki, king of the snakes, sends to the griffin, the king of the
birds, a single snake to eat. And the griffin, the king of the birds,
devours each day the snake which Vāsuki, king of the birds, sends to
him to eat. These heaps of bones are the bones of the snakes which the
griffin has eaten, and which, gradually accumulating, have come to look
like the peak of a mountain.


_Fairy-prince and griffin._

When Jīmūta-vāhana, the fairy-prince, embodiment of generosity and
compassion towards all living beings, heard this story from the lips
of his companion, he was pricked to the heart. And he said to his
companion: “Of a truth, Vāsuki, king of the snakes, is to be pitied,
for that, like a coward, he delivers with his own hand into the hands
of his most bitter enemy the snakes that are his subjects. Since he has
a thousand faces and a thousand mouths, why can he not say with one of
his mouths to the griffin who is his enemy: ‘Eat me first, O griffin!’”
Then did the noble-hearted Jīmūta-vāhana make the following Earnest
Wish: “May I, by the sacrifice of my own body and blood, obtain Supreme
Enlightenment!”

At that moment a servant summoned Jīmūta-vāhana’s companion to return
home, and Jīmūta-vāhana, embodiment of generosity and compassion
towards all living beings, was left alone. And Jīmūta-vāhana roamed
about alone, intent on carrying out the resolution which he had formed.
And as he roamed about, he heard afar off a piteous sound of weeping.
And drawing near, he beheld on a lofty slab of rock a youth of handsome
appearance plunged in bitter grief. And by his side stood an officer
of some monarch, as if he had brought him and left him there. And the
youth was seeking to persuade an old woman who was weeping, to cease
her weeping and return whence she had come.

And Jīmūta-vāhana stood and listened, melted with pity, eager to
know who he might be, and she. And the old woman, overwhelmed with
the burden of her grief, began to look again and again at the youth,
and to lament her misfortune in the following words: “Alas, my son!
thou that wast obtained by me at the cost of a hundred bitter pangs!
Alas, virtuous youth! Alas, only scion of our family, where shall I
behold thee again? Bereft of thee, thy father will be plunged into the
darkness of sorrow, and will not for long endure to live. That body of
thine, which would suffer even from the torch of the sun’s rays,--how
can it endure the agony of being devoured by the griffin? How comes it
that Fate and the king of the snakes were able to discover thee, the
only son of ill-starred me, though the world of the snakes is wide?”
Thereupon the youth said: “Mother, I am afflicted enough as it is. Why
do you afflict me more? Return to your home, I beg you. This is my last
reverence to you. The griffin will soon be here.” When the old woman
heard those words, she cast her sorrowful eyes all around the horizon,
and cried aloud: “Alas, I am undone! Who will deliver my son from
death?”

Then Jīmūta-vāhana with joy and delight went up to the old woman and
said: “Mother, I will deliver your son!”

When the old woman heard those words, she was frightened and terrified,
for she thought that the griffin had come. And straightway she cried
out: “Eat me, O griffin! eat me!” Then said the youth her son: “Mother,
be not afraid, for this is no griffin!” Then said Jīmūta-vāhana:
“Mother, I am the prince of the fairies, disguised in the garb of a
man. I am come to deliver your son from death. I will give my own body
and blood to the hungry griffin. Therefore return to your home, and
take your son with you.” But the old woman said: “By no means! for in
a still higher sense you yourself are my very own son, since you have
shown such a measure of compassion to me and my son at this time.”
Then said Jīmūta-vāhana: “I have formed a resolution, and you must not
defeat my purpose.”

Then said the youth: “O thou of great and noble heart! I cannot consent
to save my own body at the cost of thine. Should a common stone be
saved by the sacrifice of a precious stone? The world is full of those
who, like myself, pity only themselves. But few in number are those who
entertain sentiments of compassion for the whole world and for all the
living beings that are therein.” At that moment the trees began to sway
with the wind of the wings of the griffin, and seemed to utter a cry
of dissuasion. And the sea, churned by the wind, seemed with the eyes
of its bright-flashing jewels to be gazing in wonder and astonishment
at the greatness of his courage and the depth of his compassion. Then
came the griffin, hiding the heavens with his outspread wings. And
swooping down, he smote the valiant hero Jīmūta-vāhana with his beak,
and gripping him with his talons, carried him off from that slab of
rock; and soaring aloft, flew quickly with him to a peak of the Malaya
mountain, to eat him there. And Jīmūta-vāhana’s crest-jewel was torn
from his head, and drops of blood fell from his body, as the griffin
carried him through the air. And while the griffin was devouring his
body and blood, he uttered the following Earnest Wish: “May my body and
blood be offered thus in every state of my existence, and may I not
obtain rebirth in heaven or deliverance from the round of existences
if thereby I shall be deprived of the opportunity of doing good to my
neighbor!”

But afterwards, through the finding of his crest-jewel, his kinsfolk
and friends effected his deliverance from the power of the griffin, and
a goddess sprinkled him with a potion, whereupon he arose more glorious
than before, with all his limbs made whole again. And the goddess said
to him: “My son, I am pleased with this sacrifice of thy body and
blood. Therefore I sprinkle thee king of the fairies, and thy reign
shall endure for a cycle of time.” Thereupon a rain of flowers fell
from the sky, and the drums of the gods resounded with approbation.
And the griffin repented of his evil deeds, and said: “From this day
henceforth I will not again eat snakes. As for those which I have
already eaten, let them return to life again!” Then--wonderful to
relate!--all the snakes that he had previously eaten returned to
life again. Then Jīmūta-vāhana was escorted to the Himālaya, and was
sprinkled king over all the kings of the fairies, and his reign endured
for a cycle of time.




_Glossary._


  _Ace._ The losing throw at dice.

  _Ascetic._ A man who has taken a vow to remain single, and to devote
    himself to fasting, bodily torture, and meditation as a means of
    escape from the horrors of repeated existences. Specifically, a monk
    belonging to some religious order other than the order of monks
    founded by Gotama Buddha.

  _Benāres._ A sacred city of North India, situated on the Ganges. It
    was the capital of Kāsi.

  _Brahmā._ The Supreme Being, the Invincible, the All-seeing, the
    Subduer, the Lord, the Maker, the Creator, the Ancient of Days, the
    Conqueror, the Ruler, the Father of all that are and are to be.
    Gotama ignored the question whether such a being exists.

  _Brahman._ A man belonging to the priestly caste.

  _Buddha._ See Introduction.

  _Casts no shadow._ One of the marks of a demon.

  _Chatty._ An earthenware vessel.

  _Crore._ 10,000,000.

  _Devadatta._ Cousin and enemy of Gotama. The Judas of Buddhism.

  _Enlightenment._ See Introduction.

  _Exalted One._ Title of Buddha.

  _Exalted States._ Friendliness, Compassion, Sympathy, and
    Indifference.

  _Five Precepts._ (1) Thou shalt not take the life of any living
    being. (2) Thou shalt not take that which is not given. (3) Thou
    shalt not give way to the sins of the flesh. (4) Thou shalt not
    speak falsehood. (5) Thou shalt avoid occasions of heedlessness
    through the use of liquor or spirits or other intoxicants.

  _Four Requisites._ Robes, food, lodging, and medicine.

  _Fourfold Army._ Infantry, cavalry, chariots, and elephants.

  _Future Buddha._ See Introduction.

  _Ganges._ A sacred river of North India, in the valley of which
    Buddhism took its rise. The Heavenly Ganges is the Milky Way.

  _Great Being._ Title of a Future Buddha.

  _Heretic._ A man who refuses to accept the teachings of Buddha.

  _Hermitage._ Dwelling-place of a hermit or ascetic.

  _Heron’s Call._ Triumphant cry of an elephant.

  _Himālaya, Himavat._ Literally, Abode of Snow. A range of mountains,
    the loftiest in the world, forming the northeastern border of India.
    The foothills of the Himālaya range were a favorite resort for monks
    and ascetics.

  _Inconceivable._ 1 followed by 28 ciphers.

  _Jaws of Rāhu._ Eclipses of the sun and moon were supposed to be due
    to the fact that they were swallowed from time to time by a demon
    named Rāhu, the Seizer.

  _Jetavana._ Conqueror’s Grove. Name of a monastery near Sāvatthi. The
    favorite residence of the Buddha.

  _Kāsi._ A country of North India of which Benāres was the capital.

  _Kelāsa._ One of the principal peaks of the Himālaya range.

  _Kosala._ A country lying north of Kāsi, of which Sāvatthi was the
    capital.

  _Lac._ A scarlet dye.

  _Land of the Rose-apple._ India. A Rose-apple (Jambu) tree is
    represented in the illustration to Story 15, lower right.

  _Marks of the spread hand._ For good luck. The fingers were supposed
    to “point off” evil spirits.

  _Meru. Sineru._ A vast mountain occupying the centre of each of an
    infinite number of worlds.

  _Monk._ A man who has taken a vow to remain single, and to devote
    himself to meditation and good works in accordance with the
    teachings of the Buddha.

  _Nit._ A fly’s egg.

  _Play-ring._ Before beginning play, dicers would draw a circle on the
    ground or floor. So long as the play continued, a dicer was bound to
    remain within the circle. By stepping outside of the circle, a dicer
    “broke” the play-ring and stopped the play.

  _Omniscience._ Knowledge of all things. Enlightenment. By performing
    a work of merit and making an Earnest Wish thereby to attain
    Enlightenment in some future state of existence, a Future Buddha, as
    it were, sows the Seed of Omniscience.

  _Sāvatthi._ A city of North India, the capital of Kosala.

  _Seven Buddhas._ The oldest texts mention only seven Buddhas. The
    Jātaka Book mentions twenty-four. Later, the number is increased
    indefinitely.

  _Sineru._ See Meru.

  _Sprinkling._ In ancient India kings were not anointed, but sprinkled.

  _Takkasilā._ A city of Northwest India, the capital of Gandhāra. A
    famous seat of learning in ancient times.

  _Teacher._ Title of Buddha.

  _Ten Perfections._ Generosity, Morality, Renunciation, Wisdom,
    Energy, Patience, Truth, Resolution, Friendliness, Indifference.

  _Three Jewels._ The Buddha, the Doctrine, and the Order of Monks.

  _Warrior._ A man belonging to the military caste.

  _Yugandhara._ One of seven vast circles of rock which surround Mount
    Meru.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

  Archaic or variant spelling has been retained.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GRATEFUL ELEPHANT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Powers of the President during crises
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Powers of the President during crises

Author: J. Malcolm Smith
        Cornelius P. Cotter

Release date: July 18, 2024 [eBook #74067]

Language: English

Original publication: Washington, DC: Public Affairs Press, 1960

Credits: Tim Lindell, Craig Kirkwood, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POWERS OF THE PRESIDENT DURING CRISES ***


Transcriber’s Notes:

Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).

The whole number part of a mixed fraction is separated from the
fractional part with -, for example, 18-1/2.

Additional Transcriber’s Notes are at the end.

       *       *       *       *       *

POWERS OF THE PRESIDENT DURING CRISES




  POWERS
  OF THE
  PRESIDENT
  DURING
  CRISES


  J. Malcolm Smith
  and
  Cornelius P. Cotter

  PUBLIC AFFAIRS PRESS

  WASHINGTON, D. C.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Copyright, 1960, by Public Affairs Press
  419 New Jersey Avenue, S.E., Washington, D. C.

  Printed in the United States of America
  Library of Congress Catalog Card No. 59-14964




FOREWORD


The use of emergency power in a democracy raises many questions
relative to the constitutional basis for its authorization and the
manner of its exercise. If used too little and too late a democratic
state might be destroyed when the proper use of the emergency power
possibly could have saved it. If used arbitrarily and capriciously, its
use could degenerate into the worst form of dictatorship.

As a boy I was the chauffeur for a country doctor. One day while
driving to see a patient who was gravely ill, the doctor opened his
medicine chest and pointed to a glass vial containing morphine. “That
drug,” he said, “is the most potent medicine in my chest but requires
great skill in prescribing. Used properly it relieves pain and
suffering. Used improperly it makes animals of men.” Emergency power
bears to government the same general relationship of morphine to man.
Used properly in a democratic state it never supplants the constitution
and the statutes but is restorative in nature. Used improperly it
becomes the very essence of tyranny.

By reference to particular statutes and specific instances this volume
affords a graphic picture of the broad extent to which emergency power
has been employed by the United States government in recent years.
Many will view this development with alarm for the many instances of
its use make a lengthy list. Military emergency today is but one type
of national emergency. Catastrophes and economic emergencies may also
require the exercise of this type of power. Indeed, its use in this day
and time has been so frequent that the very term “emergency” is being
“shorn of meaning.”

In the present volume the authors describe and comment upon the use of
emergency power in the United States since 1933. It is their contention
that the use of emergency power was contemplated and provided for in
the Constitution. The law also provides restraints upon its use. As
Professor McIlwain has concluded, the proper test of constitutionalism
is the existence of adequate processes for keeping government
responsible. It is comforting to know that these processes exist within
our government. The primary requirement of all Americans, then, is to
keep government responsible and within these limitations, for only
when this is done can emergency power be justified under the law of the
land.

The always present danger is that emergency power may be used by
an officer or an agency of the government in order to have its own
way when constitutional or other legal restrictions might irritate
or interfere. This danger can be lessened by the selection of good
governmental personnel, but removed to a greater degree by the
enforcement of these constitutional and statutory limitations which are
made effective at times by resort to judicial review.

Readers will be indebted to the authors for this first exhaustive
account of the actual use of emergency power by the United States
government since 1933. The restraint on the freedom of the individual,
the regulation of private enterprise, the control of communications are
but some of the topics that receive minute and careful treatment. Some
readers will be concerned with the frequency of the resort to emergency
power and will view with uneasiness, as does this writer, the possible
curtailment of individual rights. Yet the authors would be the first to
agree with the statement that, “Freedom and civil liberties, far from
being incompatible with security, are vital to our national strength.”
Security and rights are here made interdependent. Others will take
satisfaction in the flexibility of the United States government that
can maintain its democratic character and still have the means of
preserving its existence under the tremendous pressure of a world war
and periods of economic crises. Irrespective of attitude, the present
volume is a telling account of the manner in which the government of
the United States has been made adaptable under the Constitution to the
problems and exigencies of the modern world.

  ROBERT S. RANKIN
  _Washington, D. C._




PREFACE


A preface is a kind of last call to dinner, as it were, in which the
authors suggest the purpose of their undertaking, chart the course they
have chosen to pursue, and acknowledge the help they have received.

This study of the President’s use of emergency powers grew out of
research and discussions in Washington, D. C., and at Harvard, the
University of California, and other institutions. In one sense, it is
a sequel to Dr. Cotter’s study of emergency powers in Great Britain,
prepared under Harvard’s Sheldon Travelling Fellowship during the
academic year 1951-52.

In preparing a political science course at the University of
California’s Riverside campus, one of the most significant gaps in
available sources and treatises about the Presidency concerned the vast
range of power, generally called emergency powers, available to the
Chief Executive should he choose to follow the prescription used by
many predecessors, notably F.D.R.

Both authors have, of course, profited from the monumental work of
Professor Edward S. Corwin, whose classic study, _The President: Office
and Powers_ remains the outstanding work in the field. Professor Robert
S. Rankin’s study, _When the Civil Law Fails_, contained valuable
historical data of particular importance. Both authors have also had
the inestimable privilege and opportunity of studying under Professor
Charles Fairman, now at Harvard Law School. Professor Fairman’s study,
_The Law of Martial Rule_, was very helpful in providing the historical
setting for government under military control. The authors were
fortunate in having read Professor Fairman’s paper delivered at the
National War College, “A Post-Atomic Attack Situation,” wherein it is
clearly brought forth that a complete plan and pattern for dealing with
a nuclear attack must be worked out that does envisage the restoration
of civil government to the nation as quickly as circumstances permit,
should the cold war ever turn into an all-out nuclear holocaust.

While the original work on the manuscript was completed before either
of the authors came to Washington, both have benefitted from the
experience of working in the Pentagon, the Commission on Civil Rights,
the Republican National Committee and the U. S. Senate. One is apt
to view the executive branch of government from a slightly different
perspective, once having been associated with “the Hill.” And, while
the Congress may feel powerless to act against a determined Chief
Executive, the power of the purse still provides the most effective of
all the “checks and balances” in our national government, except in
time of war.

The Fund for the Republic provided the authors with a grant-in-aid in
1955 to begin work on the book, although the Fund had no contact or
association with the authors during the preparation of the manuscript.

Parts of some chapters have previously appeared as article in the
_Western Political Quarterly_ and _The Journal of Politics_, and
the authors wish to acknowledge their appreciation at being able to
reproduce all or parts of these articles.

Mr. Warren Campbell served as a helpful research assistant while a
graduate student at Stanford and rendered invaluable aid. Dr. Norman
Small of the American Law Division of the Library of Congress performed
an essential editorial task in reading the entire manuscript and
suggesting very useful changes.

The authors are both grateful to Mrs. Connie Smith, a patient wife,
who spent long, dreary hours typing and re-typing the manuscript. And,
last, but by no means least, the authors reserve a special vote of the
very deepest appreciation to the Executive Director of Public Affairs
Press, Mr. M. B. Schnapper whose patience, confidence and continued
good humor made publication possible.

  J. MALCOLM SMITH AND CORNELIUS P. COTTER
  _Washington, D. C._




CONTENTS


  I
  Introduction                                                       1

  II
  The Concept of Emergency in Democratic Political Thought           4

  III
  The Concept of Emergency in American Legislation                  14

  IV
  Emergency Powers Over Persons                                     26

  V
  Governmental Acquisition of Property                              47

  VI
  Regulation of Property                                            55

  VII
  Control of Communications                                         73

  VIII
  Legislative Restraints on the Administration of Emergency Powers  93

  IX
  Inter-Agency Relationships                                       110

  X
  Judicial Review                                                  125

  XI
  Conclusions                                                      144

  References                                                       147

  Index                                                            177




ABOUT THE AUTHORS


J. Malcolm Smith received his education at the U.S. Naval Academy, the
University of Washington, and Stanford University. After three years
as an officer in the Army during World War II, he received an A.B.
degree from the University of Washington in 1946, and an M.A. (1948)
and Ph.D. (1951) from Stanford University. He has combined academic
and governmental service since he began his career as an instructor
in political science at Stanford University in 1947. He has taught at
Columbia University and the University of California. He organized the
first World Affairs Council in Los Angeles, for the Foreign Policy
Association and served as its first Executive Director from 1952-54.

Since coming to Washington, D. C., Mr. Smith served as a consultant to
the Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (1957-58), and the President’s
Commission on Civil Rights (1958-59) before joining the staff of
Senator Thomas H. Kuchel of California as Assistant to the Minority
Whip of the U.S. Senate.

Cornelius P. Cotter began his academic career at Stanford University
in 1946 following three years as a Navy Seabee in the Pacific during
the Second World War. He received his A.B. in 1949 from Stanford,
and an M.P.A. (1951) and Ph.D. in government (1953) from Harvard
University. He was a Sheldon Travelling Fellow from Harvard University
to the University of London from 1951-52. After serving as Instructor
in Government at Columbia University 1952-53, he returned to his
alma mater, Stanford, in 1953 as an Assistant Professor of Political
Science. He is currently on leave as an Associate Professor from
Stanford University to serve as a special assistant to the Chairman
of the Republican National Committee, Senator Thruston B. Morton.
From December 1958 to December 1959, he served as the Citizenship
Clearinghouse Fellow to the Republican National Committee.

The authors have contributed to the Western Political Quarterly,
Stanford Law Review, the Journal of Politics, and the Midwestern
Political Science Review. Currently they are collaborating on a
textbook in American Government.

This study of presidential emergency powers was initiated by the
authors in 1955 while teaching at Stanford and the University of
California; revision and expansion were undertaken in Washington, D.
C., during 1959 and 1960.




CHAPTER I INTRODUCTION


The general welfare, and military effectiveness of a modern industrial
nation depend upon the harmonious interaction of a complex,
interdependent network of production and transportation facilities.
The interruption of this process at any of a myriad of critical points
can disrupt the supply of essential civilian and military materials,
possibly undermining the economic health or military security of the
nation.[1] The urban concentration of population and the refinement of
communication devices and techniques for manipulating public opinion
make it increasingly possible to instill in the civilian population
an hysteria and terror which could effectively thwart national
mobilization.[2] Realization of the magnitude of the problem, and a
pervasive fear of military assault, vitally influence the process of
continuous redefinition of the balance between collective authority and
individual liberty which is the essential task of democratic government
in war as in peace. Emergency government has become the norm for
twentieth century constitutional states.

An assessment of the adequacy with which democratic government has, in
the recurrent economic and military emergencies since 1933, combined
mobilization of “the ... power of every individual and of every
material resource at its command”[3] toward the objective of national
survival and well-being, with the protection of basic individual
freedoms and the principle of responsible government which are the
heart of democracy, must in substantial part rest upon an analysis of
the contents of the statute books. That is the purpose of this study.
Its classification of legislative delegations of emergency powers to
the executive since 1933 should provide not only indication of the
extent to which coercive powers over persons and property have been
granted the executive in the name of emergency, but also a framework
for the organization of a series of studies into the use of such powers
by the executive branch, and the success of congressional and other
efforts to maintain responsible administration in time of emergency.

There exists no dearth of recorded efforts to define the ultimate
scope of the constitutional emergency power of the American executive.
Various justices of the Supreme Court have hypothesized, at one end
of a continuum, inflexible constitutional restraints upon executive
response to perceived emergency,[4] and at the other end an emergency
power which is either unrestrained[5] or unrestrainable.[6] In this
manner the Supreme Court has sought to resolve the conundrum, “How
can a virtually unlimited emergency power and a systematic body of
constitutional limitations upon government action logically coexist?
How can constitutionalism be ought but an anachronism in the twentieth
century unless constitutional governments are equipped with adequate
legal authority to carry the body politic through economic and military
emergencies of staggering dimensions?”

The considerable body of scholarly literature in this field is
principally devoted to speculation on the breadth of the “inherent,”
“residual,” “executive,” or “war” power of the President, and
description of occasions on which the nation’s chief executives have
considered it necessary to exercise a prerogative “power to act
according to discretion for the public good, without the prescription
of the law and sometimes even against it.”[7] But despite such
incidents as President Roosevelt’s 1942 Labor Day speech admonishing
the Congress that unless it repealed certain provisions of the
Emergency Price Control Act by October 1st, he would consider them
repealed,[8] emergency administration is overwhelmingly characterized
by joint participation and cooperation of the varying branches of
the federal government. American government in time of war does not
degenerate to anything resembling dictatorship, and to focus attention
upon the exceptions to executive-legislative cooperation in war
administration is to study the pathology of emergency administration.

The statute books provide at any given time a more accurate indication
of the breadth and limits of executive emergency power than do exegeses
on the Constitution, or histories emphasizing executive action
unsupported by Congress. For in theory[9] and in practice the President
will resort to an “inherent” emergency power only to the extent to
which Congress has failed to anticipate and prescribe remedial action
for such an emergency. On the assumption that a detailed study of the
emergency powers which have been delegated to the executive by Congress
in the immediate past provides insight into the probable range of such
powers which will be exercised by government in the future, the authors
have undertaken to survey and classify such delegations in the period
1933 to 1955.[10]

It is believed that the accumulation in selected contexts of the
instances of legislative delegation of emergency power will provide
striking revelation of the scope and detail of control over individuals
and groups which is practiced by constitutional governments in time of
emergency. To this we now turn.




CHAPTER II THE CONCEPT OF EMERGENCY IN DEMOCRATIC POLITICAL THOUGHT


When President Eisenhower on June 16, 1955 suspended the privilege
of the writ of _habeas corpus_ and declared a nationwide state of
mock martial law, in response to simulated A-bomb and H-bomb attacks
taking a toll of some 14 million civilian casualties, he acted on the
premise that the ordinary processes of democratic and constitutional
government do not suffice to protect the state in time of emergency and
must surrender to a modified authoritarian regime.[11] This premise
is deeply embedded in the teachings of democratic political theory,
which in its traditional and contemporary expression have counseled the
need to abandon the processes of democratic government as the first
essential response to emergency conditions.

Thus, ironically, the Western democracies which today approach the
close of three decades of economic and military emergency, and turn
their faces to additional decades in the shadow-land between peace and
war, are offered a guiding theory which regards emergency governance
as an aberration, supplanting the relationships between the various
branches of government, and between rulers and ruled which prevail
in “normal” times. In theory the struggle to preserve limited and
popularly responsible government has already been lost, for this is a
luxury we are told we cannot afford.

In the United States we have been especially prone to accept the
alleged need for transition from responsible to authoritarian
government in time of emergency, for we have on the one hand accepted
an interpretation of the Constitution whereunder the rigid restraints
imposed thereby on governmental power are susceptible of contradiction
in time of emergency, and on the other hand we have with considerable
complacence assigned to the Supreme Court the function of protecting
the essentials of constitutionalism and democracy through periods of
emergency. These two attitudes combine to enhance the sense of need
and lull the fear of supposedly temporary reversions to authoritarian
government.

In the belief that it is increasingly essential that emergency action
be sustained by a workable and empirically-based theory of democratic
emergency governance, the authors have undertaken, in the present
study, to survey the treatment of emergency by democratic political
theorists; to review the work of the Supreme Court in assessing the
validity of governmental exercises of emergency powers (placing special
emphasis upon the implications of the 1952 “Steel Seizure” cases); and,
in conclusion, to submit tentatively an approach to emergency which
they consider related to the needs of today and the realities of recent
experience.

Democratic political theorists traditionally have assumed the need in
time of emergency to subvert the governmental processes prescribed
for peacetime and to rely upon a generically different method of
government, frequently designated “constitutional dictatorship.” Many
factors contribute to this tendency.

First, it must be recognized that a theory of democratic government so
comprehensive as to traverse every vicissitude which might confront it
cannot reasonably be demanded of political philosophers.

Second, a certain amount of inertia is inevitable in any phase of man’s
endeavors. Thus it is not surprising that political theorists to date
have picked up the traditional interpretation of emergency in terms of
the Roman dictatorship and fitted it to their schemes of constitutional
government. It is a safely ambiguous doctrine with the respectability
of age. It invests an aspect of the experience of constitutional
democracies, about which very little in the way of cumulative knowledge
has been attained, with an aura of reassuring and doctrinaire certainty.

A third factor influencing the casual reliance of democratic theorists
on emergency dictatorship is the tendency to polarize the concept of
“limited” government and the supposed need for “unlimited” emergency
action. This is related to the tendency to exaggerate substantively
limited (enumerated) powers, and compartmentalized powers as integral
elements in the concept of constitutionalism.[12] In positing rigidly
circumscribed and divided governmental powers, one posits a need
contingent upon emergency to transcend such limitations. The doctrine
of constitutional dictatorship fulfills this need.


DEMOCRATIC POLITICAL THEORISTS

John Locke, describing the architecture of civil government, called
upon the English doctrine of prerogative to cope with the problem of
emergency. In times of danger to the nation, positive law set down
by the legislature might be inadequate or even a fatal obstacle to
the promptness of action necessary to avert catastrophe. In these
situations the Crown retained a prerogative “power to act according to
discretion for the public good, without the prescription of the law and
sometimes even against it.”[13] The prerogative “can be nothing but the
people’s permitting their rulers to do several things of their own free
choice where the law is silent, and sometimes too against the direct
letter of the law, for the public good and their acquiescing in it when
so done.”[14]

Properly the prerogative was exercisable only for the public good.
But Locke recognized that this moral restraint might not suffice to
avoid abuse of prerogative powers. When one government has utilized
prerogative powers for the public good, a successor may retain the
habit or resort to such powers, utilizing them for a less worthy
purpose.[15] Who shall judge the need for resorting to the prerogative,
and how may its abuse be avoided? Here Locke, too, readily admits
defeat, suggesting that “the people have no other remedy in this, as
in all other cases where they have no judge on earth, but to appeal to
Heaven.”[16]

Rousseau also assumed the need for temporary suspension of democratic
processes of government in time of emergency:

“The inflexibility of the laws, which prevents them from adapting
themselves to circumstances, may, in certain cases, render them
disastrous, and make them bring about, at a time of crisis, the ruin of
the State....

“It is wrong therefore to wish to make political institutions so strong
as to render it impossible to suspend their operation. Even Sparta
allowed its laws to lapse.

“... If ... the peril is of such a kind that the paraphernalia of the
laws are an obstacle to their preservation, the method is to nominate a
supreme ruler, who shall silence all the laws and suspend for a moment
the sovereign authority. In such a case, there is no doubt about the
general will, and it is clear that the people’s first intention is that
the State shall not perish. Thus the suspension of the legislative
authority is in no sense its abolition; the magistrate who silences it
cannot make it speak; he dominates it, but cannot represent it. He can
do anything, except make laws.”[17]

Rousseau did not fear the abuse of the emergency dictatorship or
“supreme magistracy” as he termed it. It would more likely be cheapened
by “indiscreet use.”[18]

He would rely upon a tenure of office of prescribed duration to avoid
perpetuation of the dictatorship:

“However this important trust be conferred, it is important that its
duration should be fixed at a very brief period, incapable of being
ever prolonged. In the crises which lead to its adoption, the State
is either soon lost, or soon saved; and, the present need passed,
the dictatorship becomes either tyrannical or idle. At Rome, where
dictators held office for six months only, most of them abdicated
before their time was up. If their term had been longer, they might
well have tried to prolong it still further, as the decemvirs did when
chosen for a year. The dictator had only time to provide against the
need that had caused him to be chosen; he had none to think of further
projects.”[19]

Rousseau was unwilling to rely upon an “appeal to Heaven.”

John Stuart Mill concluded his ardent defense of representative
government with a shattering aside: “I am far from condemning, in cases
of extreme necessity, the assumption of absolute power in the form of
a temporary dictatorship.”[20] This is not a loose usage of the term
“dictatorship,” but a forthright support of a grant of “absolute power”
to the dictator.

Just as in political theory the nineteenth century liberals neglected
adequately to provide for the problems which war creates, so also in
their economic theory they ignored the dislocations of a war period.
In his study of war in the nineteenth century,[21] Edmund Silberner
has shown how the liberals’ repugnance to the destructiveness of war,
their conviction of its immorality and stupidity, coupled with their
faith that the economic and cultural bonds which would be created among
nations by extensive free trade would prevent future wars, caused
them to neglect adequate theoretical treatment of the problem of war
in their economic thought. Silberner points out, for example, that in
his chief work, _Elements of Political Economy_ (1821), James Mill
virtually does not deal at all with war.[22] And Mill’s distinguished
son is brief on the subject of war. John Stuart Mill, according to
Silberner’s interpretation, seemed to admit that virtually everything
that can be said on this theme had already been expressed before
him.[23]

Thus do democratic political theorists tacitly admit the existence of a
fatal defect in any system of constitutional democracy: Its processes
are inadequate to confront and overcome emergency.


MACHIAVELLI

Machiavelli’s view of emergency powers as one element in the whole
scheme of limited government furnishes an ironic contrast to the
Lockean theory of prerogative. He recognized and attempted to bridge
this chasm in democratic political theory:

“Now in a well-ordered republic it should never be necessary to resort
to extra-constitutional measures; for although they may for the time
be beneficial, yet the precedent is pernicious, for if the practice is
once established of disregarding the laws for good objects, they will
in a little while be disregarded under that pretext for evil purposes.
Thus no republic will ever be perfect if she has not by law provided
for everything, having a remedy for every emergency, and fixed rules
for applying it.”[24]

Machiavelli attempted, perhaps without complete success, but with
greater caution than the later theorists, to design a system of
constitutionalized emergency powers.

The incumbent executive authority, on finding that an emergency
existed, could appoint a temporary “dictator”[25] on the Roman model.
The constitution was not suspended, and the emergency executive did
not enjoy absolute power. His narrow function was to cope with the
emergency.[26] He operated under the surveillance of the regularly
constituted legislators and government officials. A key element of
Machiavelli’s scheme was a short term of office--“and I call a year or
more a long time.”[27]

Thus Machiavelli--in contrast to Locke, Rousseau and Mill--sought to
incorporate into the constitution a regularized system of standby
emergency powers to be invoked with suitable checks and controls in
time of national danger. He attempted forthrightly to meet the problem
of combining a capacious reserve of power and speed and vigor in
its application in time of emergency, with effective constitutional
restraints.


CONTEMPORARY THEORISTS

Contemporary political theorists, addressing themselves to the problem
of response to emergency by constitutional democracies, have employed
the doctrine of constitutional dictatorship. Criticism of their schemes
for emergency governance is made difficult by the ambiguities latent
in the terminology they adopt. An effort is made below to distinguish
between those who mean dictatorship when they say dictatorship, and
those who say dictatorship when they mean to refer to any effort
by constitutional government to respond adequately to emergency
conditions. However idiosyncratic the individual definitions of
dictatorship, the theories of constitutional dictatorship explicitly or
implicitly posit a transition in time of emergency from the processes
of constitutionalism to those of an outright or slightly modified
authoritarian system.

Frederick M. Watkins, who is responsible for the classic study of the
Weimar experience with emergency powers,[28] appears to have based
his general discussion of emergency powers upon _a priori_ reasoning
rather than upon empirical research.[29] Provided it “serves to protect
established institutions from the danger of permanent injury in a
period of temporary emergency, and is followed by a prompt return to
the previous forms of political life,” Watkins can see “no reason why
absolutism should not be used as a means for the defense of liberal
institutions.”[30] He recognized the two key elements of the problem
of emergency governance, as well as all constitutional governance:
increasing administrative powers of the executive while at the same
time “imposing limitations upon that power.”[31] He rejects legislative
checks upon the exercise of executive emergency powers as an effective
method of imposing such limitations, for “it is clearly unrealistic to
rely on a government-controlled majority in the legislature to exercise
effective supervision over that same government in its use of emergency
powers.”[32] On the other hand, judicial review of executive emergency
action on its merits is regarded with admiration tempered only by
regret at the delay inherent in judicial proceedings.[33]

Watkins places his real faith in a scheme of “constitutional
dictatorship.” These are the conditions of success of such a
dictatorship: “The period of dictatorship must be relatively short....
Dictatorship should always be strictly legitimate in character....
Final authority to determine the need for dictatorship in any given
case must never rest with the dictator himself....”[34] The objective
of such an emergency dictatorship should be “strict political
conservatism.”

“Radical social and economic measures may, of course, be necessary as
a means of preventing political change.... Boldly inventive as it may
be in other directions, however, a truly constitutional dictatorship
must always aim at the maintenance of an existing _status quo_ in the
field of constitutional law. Deviations from the established norms of
political action may be necessary for the time being. The function of
a truly constitutional dictatorship is to provide such deviations and
at the same time to make sure that they do not go any further than is
actually necessary under the circumstances.”[35]

Carl J. Friedrich casts his analysis in terms similar to those of
Watkins.[36] It is a problem of concentrating power--in a government
where power has consciously been divided--“to cope with ...
situations of unprecedented magnitude and gravity.[37] There must be
a broad grant of powers, subject to equally strong limitations as
to who shall exercise such powers, when, for how long, and to what
end.”[38] Professor Friedrich, too, offers criteria for judging the
adequacy of any scheme of emergency powers. The emergency executive
(“dictator”) must be appointed by constitutional means--_i.e._, he
must be legitimate; he should not himself enjoy power to determine
the existence of an emergency (and here, strangely enough, he finds
the United States and Great Britain conforming to the criterion);
emergency powers should be exercised under a strict time limitation;
and last, the objective of emergency action must be the defense of the
constitutional order.[39]

Recognizing that “there are no ultimate institutional safeguards
available for insuring that emergency powers be used for the purpose of
preserving the constitution” excepting “the people’s own determination
to see them so used,” Friedrich nonetheless sees some indefinite but
influential role which the courts, even though “helpless in the face of
a real emergency,” may play to restrict the use of emergency powers to
legitimate goals. They may “act as a sort of keeper of the President’s
and the people’s conscience.”[40]

Clinton L. Rossiter, after surveying the recent history of the
employment of emergency powers in Great Britain, France, Weimar
Germany, and the United States, reverts to a description of a scheme
of “constitutional dictatorship” as solution to the vexing problems
presented by emergency.[41] Like Watkins and Friedrich, he is concerned
to state, _a priori_, the conditions of success of the “constitutional
dictatorship.”

“1. No general regime or particular institution of constitutional
dictatorship should be initiated unless it is necessary or even
indispensable to the preservation of the state and its constitutional
order....

“2. ... the decision to institute a constitutional dictatorship should
never be in the hands of the man or men who will constitute the
dictator....”[42]

“3. No government should initiate a constitutional dictatorship without
making specific provision for its termination....

“4. ... all uses of emergency powers and all readjustments in the
organization of the government should be effected in pursuit of
constitutional or legal requirements....

“5. ... no dictatorial institution should be adopted, no right invaded,
no regular procedure altered any more than is absolutely necessary for
the conquest of the particular crisis....

“6. The measures adopted in the prosecution of a constitutional
dictatorship should never be permanent in character or effect....

“7. The dictatorship should be carried on by persons representative of
every part of the citizenry interested in the defense of the existing
constitutional order....

“8. Ultimate responsibility should be maintained for every action taken
under a constitutional dictatorship....

“9. The decision to terminate a constitutional dictatorship, like the
decision to institute one, should never be in the hands of the man or
men who constitute the dictator....

“10. No constitutional dictatorship should extend beyond the
termination of the crisis for which it was instituted....

“11. ... the termination of the crisis must be followed by as
complete a return as possible to the political and governmental
conditions existing prior to the initiation of the constitutional
dictatorship....”[43]

Rossiter accords to the legislature (in the case of the United States,
at any rate) a far greater role in the oversight of executive exercise
of emergency powers than does Watkins. He would secure to Congress
final responsibility for declaring the existence or termination of
an emergency,[44] and he places great faith in the effectiveness of
congressional investigating committees.[45] In this work he offers no
clear statement of the proposed relationship of the judiciary to his
scheme of “constitutional dictatorship.” In a subsequent study, he
concluded on the basis of a critical review of the Supreme Court that
it was impotent “as overseer and interpreter of the war powers.”[46]


CONTEMPORARY THEORIES IN THE LIGHT OF RECENT EXPERIENCE.

The suggestion that democracies surrender the control of government to
an authoritarian ruler in time of grave danger to the nation is not
based upon sound constitutional theory, or the experience of Great
Britain or the United States in this century.

To appraise emergency powers--in spite of all experience to the
contrary--in terms of the Procrustean mold of constitutional
dictatorship serves merely to distort the problem and hinder realistic
analysis. It matters not whether the term “dictator” is used in its
normal sense (as applied to recent authoritarian rulers) or is employed
as Friedrich makes explicit[47] and Rossiter implies, to embrace
all chief executives administering emergency powers. However used,
“constitutional dictatorship” cannot be divorced from the implication
of suspension of the processes of constitutionalism. Suspension is
required because constitutionalism is viewed as a system imposing and
providing inflexible safeguards against evasion of these limitations.

A concept of constitutionalism which is less misleading in the analysis
of problems of emergency powers, and which is consistent with the
findings of this study, is that formulated by Charles H. McIlwain.[48]
While it does not by any means necessarily exclude some indeterminate
limitation upon the substantive powers of government, full emphasis
is placed upon procedural limitations, and political responsibility.
McIlwain clearly recognized the need to repose adequate power in
government. And in discussing the meaning of constitutionalism he
insisted that the historical and proper test of constitutionalism
was the existence of adequate processes for keeping government
responsible. He refused to equate constitutionalism with the enfeebling
of government by an exaggerated emphasis upon separation of powers
and substantive limitations on governmental power. He found that
“the really effective checks on despotism have consisted not in the
weakening of government, but rather in the limiting of it; between
which there is a great and very significant difference.”[49] In
associating constitutionalism with “limited” as distinguished from
“weak” government, McIlwain meant government limited to the orderly
procedure of law as opposed to the processes of force.[50] “The two
fundamental correlative elements of constitutionalism for which all
lovers of liberty must yet fight are the legal limits to arbitrary
power and a complete political responsibility of government to the
governed.”[51]

If such is the basic nature of constitutionalism, it does not wrap
government in the steel bonds of a series of substantive limitations,
or compartmentalize power in discrete units.[52] The true nature of
the issue which emergency presents for constitutional governments
may then be recognized: It is the two-pronged problem of determining
the extent to which the objectives of human action shall be socially
defined and achieved or self-determined by the individual or group;[53]
and, correlatively, that of balancing, through adequate legislative,
administrative and judicial checks, the increased discretionary powers
of the executive which accompany expanded governmental functions. It
is a matter of historical fact that modern constitutional democracies
have not, upon the rise of emergency conditions, found it necessary
to suspend constitutional processes, or to resort to the schemes for
organization of power hypothesized by those who hitherto have written
on the subject.

What the British, particularly, have come to recognize in the course
of the last five decades is that emergency governance is one form of
an acute and continuing problem in modern constitutional democracies:
that of allotting increasing areas of discretionary powers to the
executive, while insuring that such powers will be exercised with a
sense of political responsibility and under effective limitations
and checks.[54] In time of emergency, governmental action may vary
in breadth and intensity from more normal times, yet it need not be
less constitutional. In time of war as in peace government according
to the orderly procedure of the law, and government responsible to
the governed, has proven its ability to meet the needs imposed by the
accelerated tempo and the growing complexity of the twentieth century.




CHAPTER III THE CONCEPT OF EMERGENCY IN AMERICAN LEGISLATION


Emergency, as a generic term applicable to individual and group
situations as well as to the state, connotes the existence of
conditions suddenly intensifying the degree of existing danger to life
or well-being beyond that which is accepted as normal. (A standard
dictionary definition mentions the element of surprise, which may be
present but is by no means necessarily integral to the existence of an
emergency. An intense threat to life or well-being is not necessarily
lessened by anticipation.) An emergency requires extraordinary and
prompt corrective action. A typical British recital of the proper
objectives of emergency action inferrentially includes “... securing
the public safety, the defense of the realm, the maintenance of public
order and the efficient prosecution of any war in which His Majesty
may be engaged, and ... maintaining supplies and services essential
to the life of the community.”[55] Public disorder, war and threat of
invasion, interruption of the production or flow of essential supplies
and services--any of these may intensify danger to life or well-being
beyond acceptable limits. A similarly broad definition is contained
in the American Labor-Management Relations Act of 1947, the national
emergency section of which permits the President to curb strike action
which “if permitted to occur or to continue, [would] imperil the
national health or safety.”[56]

Implicit in these definitions are the elements of intensity, variety,
and perception. Presumably when the point of normal tolerance of danger
has been passed, it remains possible to measure the intensity of the
danger according to some scale. Obviously there are varieties of
emergency. A war emergency differs in some respects from an emergency
caused by natural catastrophe or industrial unrest. Emergencies vary in
their source or cause, and in their impact. Finally, before corrective
action can be taken, someone in a position of authority must perceive
the existence of the emergency.

It would be idle to conduct an analysis of the problem of emergency
in the constitutional state without first determining the range of
situations which have been recognized by democratic legislatures and
executives to constitute emergencies--_i.e._, to warrant exceptionally
quick, vigorous, and possibly novel action. When the legislature
enacts a standby statute, instead of itself proclaiming an emergency,
to whom does it entrust the power to determine the existence of an
emergency, and within what limits? What are the powers which democratic
legislatures grant the executive branch, enabling it to so order
individual and group behavior as, in the first instance, to avoid
intensification of the threat to the life or well-being of community
and state, and ultimately restore conditions to normal? Finally, what
if any measures are prescribed for insuring responsible administration
of such powers?

This chapter is addressed to the basic questions going to the nature of
emergency--intensity, variety, perception. The remaining parts of this
study respond to the other questions posed above.


EMERGENCIES VARY IN INTENSITY

The executive and the legislature certainly appear to think in terms
of a scale of intensity when they declare emergencies. We might,
perhaps, project our listing from the shadow land verging upon or
falling just short of emergency. A Presidential Proclamation of 1934
speaks of regulations justified by the existence of “exceptional and
exigent circumstances.”[57] The Central Intelligence Agency Act of 1949
uses the terms extraordinary and emergency interchangeably, speaking
of expenditure of unaudited funds “for objects of a confidential,
extraordinary, or emergency nature.”[58] The simple declaration “that a
national emergency exists,”[59] contained in the President’s September
8, 1939 Proclamation of a neutrality emergency, will serve as well
as any other enactment as a characteristic example of the scale of
intensity necessary to declare a national emergency.

Beyond this intensity of emergency, Congress has addressed itself
to “distressed” emergencies,[60] “serious” emergencies,[61]
“intensified” emergencies,[62] “unprecedented” emergencies,[63] “acute”
emergencies,[64] and at the outer extreme, “unlimited” emergencies.[65]


VARIETIES OF EMERGENCY

Emergencies, as perceived by legislature or executive in the United
States since 1933, have been occasioned by a wide range of situations,
classifiable under three principal heads: a. economic, b. natural
disaster, and c. national security.


ECONOMIC EMERGENCIES

_Depression_: President Roosevelt in declaring a bank holiday a few
days after taking office in 1933 proclaimed that “heavy and unwarranted
withdrawals of gold and currency from ... banking institutions for the
purpose of hoarding; and ... continuous and increasingly extensive
speculative activity abroad in foreign exchange” resulting in “severe
drains on the Nation’s stocks of gold ... have created a national
emergency,” requiring his action.[66] The Bank Conservation Act, passed
a few days later gave the President plenary power in time of war or
during any other period of “national emergency” to control transactions
in foreign exchange, transfers of payment, and prevention of hoarding.
It also declared “that a serious emergency exists and that it is
imperatively necessary speedily to put into effect remedies of uniform
national application.”[67] Later in March, in permitting Federal
Reserve Bank loans to state banks and trust companies, Congress made
specific reference to the existing emergency in banking.[68]

The Federal Emergency Relief Act of 1933 opened with a declaration that
the economic depression created a serious emergency, due to wide-spread
unemployment and the inadequacy of State and local relief funds,
resulting in the existing or threatened deprivation of a considerable
number of families and individuals of the necessities of life, and
making it imperative that the Federal Government cooperate more
effectively with the several States and Territories and the District of
Columbia in furnishing relief to their needy and distressed people.[69]
Here then was an emergency created by the inadequacy of previous effort
to cope with abnormal threats to the well-being of the population. The
Municipal Bankruptcy Act of May 24, 1934 also described the emergency
in terms which related it to the inability of local government
units to function properly. Congress declared a national emergency
existed, caused by the increasing financial difficulties of many local
governmental units, which rendered imperative “the further exercise of
the bankruptcy powers of the Congress.”[70]

On the same day that he signed the Emergency Relief Act, the President
also signed an Act describing another facet of the emergency. The
latter Act stated “the present acute economic emergency” was in
part the result of very low prices for farm products. The effect of
declining income for the American farmer had virtually destroyed
his purchasing power, thus undermining the agricultural assets
supporting the national credit structure.[71] The causal phenomena for
declarations of emergency were, according to the statutes, heavy and
unwarranted withdrawals of gold, severe drains on the Nation’s stocks
of gold, widespread unemployment, and a severe and increasing disparity
between the prices of agricultural and other commodities. Efforts to
meet the emergency situation were directed immediately to ameliorate
the existing emergency conditions and ultimately so alter the causal
phenomena as to eliminate the causes of the existing threat to national
well-being. The Gold Reserve Act of 1934 made passing reference to “the
existing emergency.”[72] The President in January 1936 proclaimed that
this emergency had not been terminated but, on the contrary, had been
intensified in different ways by unsettled conditions in international
commerce and finance and in foreign exchange.[73] As late as 1941
Congress continued certain of the powers delegated in the Gold Reserve
Act until June 1943 “unless the President shall sooner declare the
existing emergency ended.”[74]

In 1953 Congress authorized the President to declare the existence
of economic disaster in any area. Thereafter the Secretary of
Agriculture, on finding that an economic disaster had created a need
for agricultural credit that could not be met for a temporary period
from commercial banks or other responsible sources, might authorize
emergency loans to farmers.[75]

Some statutes, on the other hand, identify emergency with the causal
phenomena instead of their product. The National Industrial Recovery
Act, for example, simply declared that a national emergency existed.
This emergency, according to the statute was productive of widespread
unemployment and disorganization of industry, which burdened interstate
and foreign commerce, affected the public welfare, and undermined the
standards of living of the American people.[76]

The Securities Exchange Act of 1934 found that national emergencies,
which produced widespread unemployment and the dislocation of
trade, transportation, and industry, burdened interstate commerce
and adversely affected the general welfare, were “precipitated,
intensified, and prolonged by manipulation and sudden and unreasonable
fluctuations of security prices and by excessive speculation on such
exchanges and markets.”[77] In these two statutes the term emergency
is first used in a context associating it with causal agency, and
secondly as something intermediate between the causal agents and the
disagreeable ultimate effects.

While calling attention to the occasionally variable usage of the term
emergency, we by no means intend to develop a metaphysics of emergency
in order to settle the question whether it is rightfully applied
to cause, effect, or something intermediate. We are satisfied to
accept the overwhelming legislative tendency to apply the term to the
undesired effects of events, attributing variant usages to imprecise
draftmanship.

At this point it is appropriate to indicate that many statutes (some
of which are described here; some of which, for sake of brevity or
avoiding the redundant, are not) either declare the existence of,
or describe action to be taken in the event of the occurrence of,
a situation which by other statutes has been termed an emergency.
Statutes in this category, describing the situation but refraining from
applying the term emergency to them, are illustrated by the following:
A Tariff Act amendment of June 1934 gives the President the power
to curtail imports if he finds that existing duties or other import
restrictions of the United States or any foreign country burden and
restrict the foreign trade of the United States.[78] The Securities
Exchange Act associates emergency, among other things, with the
burdening of interstate and foreign commerce.

Did Congress intend the Tariff Act Amendment as an emergency statute?
At that particular time, probably not. But later amendments to the
Tariff Act specifically refer to emergency conditions affecting the
American fisheries industry. We do not believe it is necessary to
ferret out the precise Congressional intent in Acts which do not
explicitly use the term emergency or describe the object of correcting
legislation in terms which clearly reflect Congress’ finding that an
emergency exists.

_Inflation_: We have included in the economic section some of the
statutes designed to prevent or alleviate wartime inflation. Enacted
within months after Japan’s attack on Pearl Harbor, the Emergency Price
Control Act of 1942 was designed to prevent economic dislocations
from endangering the national defense and security and the effective
prosecution of the war.[79] The factors contributing to the national
emergency included “speculative, unwarranted, and abnormal increases
in prices and rents; ... profiteering, hoarding, manipulation,
speculation, and other disruptive practices.” The war effort would
be aided through insuring that defense appropriations were not
dissipated by excessive prices; by protecting persons with relatively
fixed and limited incomes, consumers, wage earners, investors, and
persons dependent on life insurance, annuities, and pensions, from
undue impairment of their standard of living through skyrocketing
prices. Colleges, local government units, and other institutions
with relatively fixed incomes were also to be protected against the
inflationary spiral. The emergency price control measure was formulated
in anticipation of a possible post emergency collapse of values and was
aimed at the avoidance thereof.

The Proclamation of May 27, 1941, in which President Roosevelt declared
the existence of an unlimited emergency caused by the supposed expanded
war aims of the Axis powers, carefully translated the emergency into
economic terms. The President advised businessmen that in maximizing
war production they would be protecting a world in which free
enterprise could exist; and workingmen, in so doing, would protect a
society in which labor and management could bargain on free and equal
terms. Benefits were also forecast for privately endowed institutions
and local governmental units.[80] The extension of price controls in
1946 was attributed to the continued existence “of abnormally excessive
spending power in relation to the presently available supply of
commodities.”[81] And the Renegotiation Act was addressed to meeting
the emergency within an emergency created by the wartime disruption
of competitive conditions in regard to the placing of defense
contracts.[82]

_Strikes_: The Emergency Railroad Transportation Act of 1933 was
designed to relieve obstructions and burdens on interstate commerce
resulting from “the present acute economic emergency.”[83]

The Railway Labor Act of 1934 thereupon sought, by imposing collective
bargaining upon the railroads and through a National Mediation Board
and _ad hoc_ emergency boards appointed by the President (nothing
new, of course, in railroad regulation), to avoid exacerbation of
the emergency through rail strikes.[84] The War Labor Disputes Act
permitted drastic presidential and War Labor Board regulation of
labor-management relations to avoid impeding or delaying the war effort
in consequence of strikes.[85] The Labor Management Relations Act,
better known as the Taft-Hartley Act, created special procedures for
delaying strikes whenever in the opinion of the President a threatened
strike or lock-out affecting an entire industry or substantial part
thereof would imperil the national health or safety if the strike
occurred or were allowed to continue. This Act of course, grants the
determining power to the President only where interstate commerce, in
all its varieties, is involved.[86]

_Housing_: The Veterans’ Emergency Housing Act of 1946 declared that
the long-term housing shortage and the war combined to create an
unprecedented emergency shortage of housing, particularly for veterans
of World War II and their families.[87] President Truman promptly cited
the building program provided for in the Act and the unprecedented
emergency shortage of housing in exercising his authority under the
Tariff Acts to remove the duty from articles certified by the Housing
Expediter as timber, lumber, or lumber products suitable for the
construction or completion of housing accommodations.[88] The Housing
and Rent Act of 1949 also was directed at this emergency.[89]

_Agricultural Commodities_: Congress occasionally has recognized the
existence of an emergency with regard to a particular agricultural or
other commodity. Without using the term emergency, Congress plainly was
taking emergency action when it adopted a concurrent resolution in June
1934 directing the Federal Trade Commission to investigate conditions
with respect to the sale and distribution of milk and other dairy
products.[90] Decline in the price of milk to the farmer had produced
severe hardships and suffering to milk producers throughout the United
States and strikes and violence in many rural and metropolitan centers.
The Resolution went on to say that the continuation of the practices
then engaged in by milk distributors and certain leaders of milk
cooperatives, seriously endangered the efforts of the Agricultural
Adjustment Administration and of the several States to alleviate and
remedy the distress so widespread among dairy farmers in the United
States at the time. If this distress were permitted to continue
the result would be the destruction of the already sorely pressed
agricultural industry. Congress clearly noted the inability of the
states to cope with an emergency situation and proceeded to initiate
its own action.

In like manner the Tobacco Control Act of 1934 was aimed at improving
conditions in the tobacco-growing industry by placing it on a sound
financial and economic basis and by eliminating unfair competition and
practices in the production and marketing of tobacco entering into
the channels of interstate and foreign commerce. Moreover the Act was
in general designed to “relieve the present emergency with respect to
tobacco.”[91] The Sugar Act of 1937 permitted the President to suspend
certain of its provisions upon a finding that a national economic or
other emergency exists with respect to sugar or liquid sugar.[92] The
President found conditions sufficiently severe in the sugar industry to
declare a sugar emergency in 1939, 1942, and 1947.[93]

A 1942 Presidential Proclamation noted that codfish constituted one
of the basic staples in the diet of the low-income groups in Puerto
Rico. Unfortunately, the war imposed severe limitations on this import
from Canada, Newfoundland and Labrador, thereby vitally affecting
Puerto Ricans dependent on this basic food in their diet.[94] The
President sought a quick remedy by invoking the emergency provisions
of the Tariff Act of 1930[95] to authorize the duty-free importation
of “jerked beef ... a satisfactory substitute for codfish,” at
least according to the proclamation. Invoking the same statute, the
President, again in April 1942, authorized the duty-free importation
of food, clothes, and medical, surgical, and other supplies by or
directly for the account of The American National Red Cross for use
by that agency in emergency relief work in connection with the “war
emergency.”[96]


EMERGENCIES OCCASIONED BY NATURAL CATASTROPHES

_Drought_: Two statutes and one Presidential Proclamation in this
category attribute emergency conditions to drought. In February 1934
Congress authorized the Farm Credit Administration to make loans for
feed for livestock in drought- and storm-stricken areas.[97] The
Emergency Appropriation Act for fiscal 1935 appropriated funds to meet
the emergency and necessity for relief in stricken agricultural areas
and in another section referred to “the present drought emergency.”[98]
The Presidential Proclamation noting that an unusual lack of rain in
several western and mid-western states had caused an acute shortage
of feed for livestock,[99] declared an emergency under the suitable
provision of the 1930 Tariff Act and authorized suspension of duties
on livestock feeds. Only livestock owners in the affected area were
eligible to benefit from duty free livestock feeds.[100]

The Communications Act of 1934[101] and its 1951 amendment[102] grant
the President certain powers in time “of public peril or disaster.”
The other statutes provide for existing or anticipated emergencies
attributable to earthquake, flood, tornado, cyclone, hurricane,
conflagration and landslides.[103]

_Agricultural Pests_: A joint resolution of April 1937 made “funds
available for the control of incipient or emergency outbreaks of insect
pests or plant diseases, including grasshoppers, Mormon crickets, and
chinch bugs.”[104] Funds were appropriated on this authorization later
that month.[105]

_Famine_: The India Emergency Food Aid Act of 1951 provided for
emergency shipments of food to India to meet famine conditions then
ravaging the great Asian sub-continent.[106] In August 1953 Congress
enacted general enabling legislation to permit the President to
furnish emergency assistance on behalf of the people of the United
States to friendly peoples in meeting famine or other urgent relief
requirements.[107] Thus the American Congress has sometimes defined
emergency in terms of occurrences in other countries.


NATIONAL SECURITY EMERGENCIES

These may be cataloged under the heads of (1) Neutrality, (2) Defense,
(3) Civil Defense, (4) Hostilities or War.

_Neutrality Emergencies_: For a nation which, at least during the
1930s raised to the topmost position on its list of twentieth century
mistakes its involvement in the First World War, and which during the
same period embraced the policy of non-involvement in future wars,
the chief problem of national security was not so much to be prepared
for war or to avoid the occurrence of war, as it was, rather, to
stay out of other people’s wars, all wars being other people’s. The
existence of a war elsewhere in the world, especially one involving a
major power, creates the need for emergency action designed to avoid
the greatest of all emergencies, participation in a war. This is the
meaning of the Neutrality Act of 1935 and its successors. The import
thereof is embodied in the Presidential Proclamations which, under
the Neutrality Acts, proclaimed the existence of wars between states
or factions within states; but also the more important Proclamation
of September 8, 1939 which, without citing the acts, declared the
existence of a national emergency “to the extent necessary for proper
observance, safeguarding, and enforcing of the neutrality of the United
States and the strengthening of our national defense within the limits
of peacetime authorizations.”[108] Neutrality doctrine, oriented as
this was, contained the seeds of a more aggressive policy, and it
was appropriate that the President should phrase his May 27, 1941
declaration of an unlimited national emergency as an enlargement upon
the earlier Proclamation. The President declared that an unlimited
national emergency confronting the country required that its military,
naval, air and civilian defenses be placed in a condition of readiness
to repel any and all acts or threats of aggression directed toward any
part of the Western Hemisphere.[109] The need was now for adequate
preparation rather than insulation. President Roosevelt’s forthright
statement of the Nation’s security requirements left little doubt that
we had passed from neutrality to all-out preparedness as a national
policy. For the security of this Nation and Hemisphere, we should
pass from peacetime authorizations of military strength to whatever
basis was needed to protect this entire hemisphere against invasion,
encirclement or penetration by foreign agents.[110] The concept of
neutrality dominant for a few years had been superseded by events.

_Defense_: Many of the statutes directed at meeting the threat
to national survival posed by war are phrased in terms of the
existence of war or threat of war. Thus it is not rigidly possible
to assign separate pigeon-holes to those statutes which explicitly
or by inference define emergency in terms of the need for defense
preparedness, and those which define emergency in terms of the need
for response to existing hostilities. The 1951 amendments to the
Universal Military Training and Service, like the 1940 Act,[111] by
inference suggest that military emergency is not related solely to
the existence of hostilities. The President is authorized under the
statute “from time to time, whether or not a state of war exists, to
select and induct for training in the National Security Training Corps
... such number of persons as may be required....”[112] The Interior
Department Appropriation Act for fiscal 1948 included provision for
cases of emergency caused by fire, flood, storm, act of God, or
sabotage.[113] One cannot draw too sharp a distinction between war
and peace; an act of sabotage is as likely as fire, flood, storm,
or act of God. An Act of November 1940 launches upon an extensive
list of national-defense material and national-defense premises--so
comprehensive as to include anything whatsoever associated with defense
production or transportation, including public utilities--and lists
punishments for the willful injury or destruction of war material, or
of war premises.[114] And following the war, it must be made clear
that the emergency and the need for emergency action continue. The war
emergency has reverted to a defense emergency. And so we turn to the
First War Powers Act of 1941 and revise it “by striking out the words
‘the prosecution of the war effort’ and ‘the prosecution of the war’
and inserting the words ‘the national defense’.”[115]

_Civil Defense_: By Proclamation, on October 22, 1941, having in the
spring of that year created an Office of Civilian Defense, President
Roosevelt indicated that among the facets of a war emergency might
be the endangering of civilian lives and property, and he invited
all persons throughout the nation to give thought to their duties
and responsibilities in the defense of this country, and to become
better informed of the many vital phases of the civilian defense
program.[116] The Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950 contemplated an
attack or series of attacks by an enemy of the United States which
conceivably would cause substantial damage or injury to civilian
property or persons in the United States by any one of several means:
sabotage, the use of bombs, shellfire, or atomic, radiological,
chemical, bacteriological, or biological means or other weapons or
processes.[117] Such an occurrence would cause a “National Emergency
for Civil Defense Purposes,” or “a state of civil defense emergency,”
during the term which the Civil Defense Administrator would have
recourse to extraordinary powers outlined in the Act.[118] Powers and
relationships set up to effectuate response to a preparedness or civil
defense emergency are shortly seen to be convenient for application
to any garden-variety emergency which happens along, and so it is not
surprising to observe that arrangements created in anticipation of
military emergency are soon applied to natural catastrophes. The New
York-New Jersey Civil Defense Compact supplies an illustration in this
context for emergency cooperation. “‘Emergency’ as used in this compact
shall mean and include invasion or other hostile action, disaster,
insurrection or imminent danger thereof....”[119]

_Hostilities or War_: The Tariff Act of 1930[120] which has already
been cited a number of times in this chapter, permitted certain action
by the President whenever an emergency exists by reason of a state
of war, or otherwise. The Communications Act of 1934 and its 1951
amendment grant exceptional powers when there exists war or a threat of
war.[121] The 1940 National Defense Act amendments extended enlistments
in the Army in time of war or other emergency.[122] The May 1945
extension of the Selective Training and Service Act continued it in
effect for the duration of hostilities in the present war.[123] And the
threat seems the more intimate when the emergency is defined in terms
of enemies who have entered upon the territory of the United States as
part of an invasion or predatory incursion, ... to commit sabotage,
espionage or other hostile or warlike acts.[124] The 1950 Emergency
Detention Act[125] permits the President to declare the existence
of an Internal Security Emergency, upon the occurrence of invasion,
declaration of war by Congress, or insurrection within the United
States.


PERCEIVING THE EXISTENCE OF AN EMERGENCY

Congress is more than likely to delegate to the President power to
determine an emergency’s existence, sometimes providing him with
connotative definitions--such as “by reason of flood, earthquake, or
drought”--for guidance. It is particularly inclined to permit the
President to declare the termination of an emergency, frequently
hinging the life of an emergency statute to such a Presidential
declaration or to the continuance of emergency previously proclaimed
by the President. But there is a growing tendency for the Congress
to grant contingent powers which may be exercised in the event of a
declaration of emergency either by Congress or the President, and
sometimes by Congress alone. We discuss elsewhere the growing trend
toward reservation to the Congress of power to terminate an emergency
through adoption of a concurrent resolution (which does not require
the President’s signature). The Emergency Detention Act provision
for declaration of an Internal Security Emergency, mentioned above,
hinges the presidential declaration, among other things, to a prior
Congressional declaration of war. Thus when Congress has declared a
war emergency to exist, the President, at his discretion may declare
the existence of an Internal Security Emergency caused by the prospect
of internal subversion. Congress, perhaps, forecast the future
trend of legislative-executive relations in this field and in the
adaptation of emergency action when in the First Decontrol Act of 1947
it declared “in each ... limited instance [that it is necessary to
continue emergency controls in effect] the authority for such emergency
controls and war powers should not be exercised by the grant of broad,
general war powers but should be granted by restrictive, specific
legislation.”[126]


CONCLUSION

It may be seen that a varied assortment of situations threatening
the economic interests of groups, the life and limb of the populace,
or the physical integrity of the nation itself, have been defined as
emergencies in the United States. The spread lies between a liquid
sugar or codfish emergency and an emergency caused by the global
military and ideological activities of the communist movement. The
citizen of the democratic state, having weathered depression, natural
disaster, agricultural, defense and war emergencies, and recognizing
that by popular consensus he lives in a time of cold war emergency
which may turn into a war emergency, or if lessened, may create an
emergency by virtue of the threat to continued prosperity resulting
from curbed defense orders, is entitled to be apprehensive.

The variety is so great, the invocation of emergency so ready that
one must ask whether the term is not becoming shorn of meaning--a
shibboleth for the legitimization of ordinarily suspect governmental
action desired by influential groups. Shibboleth or not, the individual
citizen, as we shall see subsequently, finds that its incantation is
associated with increasing constrictions upon his freedom of action.




CHAPTER IV EMERGENCY POWERS OVER PERSONS


Constitutional democracies as well as authoritarian states are
confronted in time of military crisis with the need for a maximum
productive and military effort directed at national survival.
Totalitarian nations in their practice of total absorption of
the materials and energies of conquered nations, and the Western
democracies in their insistence upon “unconditional surrender” have
contributed to the transformation of modern war from a struggle for
limited objectives to a struggle for survival.

The initial response of Great Britain in the First World War indicated
an assumption that war imposed upon a nation the necessity to adapt
the machinery of the government, and especially its military arm, to
the attainment of victory. Twentieth century wars, like those of the
Nineteenth century, were to be fought by the military. In terms of
the total national energies, war represented a temporary, localized
diversion. Democracies continue to manifest a not necessarily unhealthy
predisposition, even in the atomic age, to treat war as a subsidiary
effort which should not unduly ripple the accustomed habits and
interests of the major segment of the population and economy. War is
fought by governments, not by peoples. True, perhaps, in regard to
police actions which constitute occasional escape valves for aggressive
energies which might otherwise erupt in world war, this aphorism which
is maintained as a fiction in time of major war, is a residue of an
earlier and simpler age.

However tentative their initial response to World War II, the Western
democracies soon came to regard it as imposing the need not simply to
adapt governmental structure to the major purpose of victory, but to
maintain consistency between the political and economic activities of
individuals and this overriding goal. Exercising a frankly coercive
power, governments in the Second World War conscripted the energies of
individuals. Great Britain imposed a labor draft as well as a military
draft. The United States, resisting nationwide demands for conscription
of labor, satisfied itself with commanding the military services of
individuals. Both countries identified individuals whom, it seemed,
could best be integrated in the war effort by being integrated _out_
of it--_i.e._, potential saboteurs, espionage agents, and the like.
However adequate or inadequate the techniques for measuring individual
and group loyalty, the measurement was undertaken and thousands found
themselves immobilized behind barbed wires.

A person naive in political and human relations or a government facing
nascent revolution would resort solely to the technique of command
and coercion to secure the adjustment of individual goals and efforts
to those of the nation. Thus in the United States many war programs
depended upon the offering of incentives or simple exhortation and
appeal to individual loyalty for their effectiveness. And, in a
democracy it remains true in time of war as in peacetime, that the
essential nature of the political process is “the translation of
conflict among interest groups into authoritative decision.”[127]

These are the conditions under which statutes and presidential
proclamations relating to the mobilization of the human resources of
the nation will be discussed.


POSITIVE INTEGRATION

_Civilian Labor Force_: Notwithstanding the failure of the United
States to adopt a form of outright labor conscription in the last war,
a number of statutory provisions did attempt to integrate segments
of the labor force more closely in the war effort. Those which were
primarily repressive in nature--i.e., which principally concerned the
imposition of penalties or the prohibition of specified activities--are
treated in the second section of this chapter.

In June 1939, Congress set up a program for the training of civil
aircraft pilots.[128] The Navy Department Appropriations Act for
fiscal 1941[129] included an emergency fund to enable the President,
among other things, to procure and train civilian personnel necessary
in connection with the production of critical and essential items of
equipment and material and the use or operation of such equipment and
material. A month later, Congress authorized the Secretary of War,
during the period of any national emergency declared by the President,
to employ laborers and mechanics in excess of forty hours per week, at
time and one-half for overtime.[130] Another 1940 law suspended during
the national emergency statutory provisions imposing the eight hour day
for Maritime Commission contractors.[131]

Section 801 of the Second War Powers Act of 1942 authorized the
President to direct the assignment of Civilian Conservation Corps
manpower to protect the munitions, aircraft, and other war industries,
municipal water supply, power, and other utilities, and to protect
resources subject to the hazards of forest fires.[132]

Emergency conditions may lead to relaxation of the traditional American
rule, based upon the assumption that public employment is a privilege
and upon security grounds, that aliens are ineligible for governmental
positions--especially positions in the military establishments. In 1946
Congress suspended statutory provisions prohibiting the employment of
aliens.[133] Thus the Secretary of the Navy could authorize the Navy
Department to employ non-citizens whose special technical or scientific
knowledge or experience would be of benefit to the military services of
the United States. The wisdom of this legislation may be more readily
appreciated when it is remembered that German rocket experts like Dr.
Werner von Braun were able to serve in the United States rather than
behind the Iron Curtain. Similarly, as illustrated by the Selective
Service Act of 1948,[134] effective mobilization of the labor force
requires exemption of some specially skilled persons from military
conscription. This Act authorized the President to provide for the
deferment from training and service certain categories of individuals
in many different fields as found to be necessary to the maintenance of
the national health, safety, or interest.

Work stoppages are the nemesis of any defense production program. The
wartime efforts to prevent or speedily terminate such stoppages are
reported in the next section, on the theory that they were primarily
coercive in nature. The Defense Production Act of 1950,[135] however,
clearly reflects the statutory trend in the United States against the
outlawing of strikes in time of emergency. Section 502 of the Act
emphasizes that national policy is to place primary reliance upon
the parties to any labor dispute to settle their differences through
negotiation and collective bargaining, making full use of available
mediation and conciliation facilities. All settlements should be
made in the national interest. The President is to initiate strike
settlement conferences, with representatives of the public present, but
no action inconsistent with the Labor-Management Relations Act of 1947
may be taken.[136]

Current information on the availability of essential skills must be
maintained. The National Science Foundation Act of 1950 included
among the functions of the agency that of maintaining a register
of scientific and technical personnel and providing a central
clearinghouse for information covering all scientific and technical
personnel in the United States.[137]

_The Military Services_: Maintenance on active duty or in reserve
status of armed forces components adequate to the defense of the United
States is of continuing concern to the government. It is not alone in
time of war that attention is given to the adequacy of the military
services. Thus the 1930’s witnessed a series of amendments to the 1916
National Defense Act designed to improve the status of the reserve
components of the Army. In June 1933, during the famous first hundred
days of the Roosevelt administration, it was not too preoccupied with
depression legislation to secure legislation introducing changes into
procedures for establishing National Guard policy. All policies and
regulations affecting the organization, training and distribution of
the National Guard were to be prepared by committees of appropriate
branches or divisions of the War Department General Staff.

The Guard would be entitled to equal representation with the Regular
Army in formulating Guard policies, but the paramount fact was that
of federal supervision and integration of the National Guard.[138]
Further, the President was empowered to determine the number of reserve
officers in the various grades to be appointed to the Officers’ Reserve
Corps, and to make such appointments, subject to Senatorial approval
for ranks above Colonel.[139] This is a characteristic extension of the
president’s power as Commander-in-Chief.

Two years later, in June 1935, a further amendment to the 1916 statute
gave the President authority in an emergency at any time to order
officers of the National Guard to active duty for the duration of the
emergency, with the proviso, however, that no officer could be employed
on active duty for more than fifteen days in any calendar year without
his own consent.[140] Later that year the President was authorized to
call annually one thousand Reserve Officers (mostly R.O.T.C. graduates)
for a year’s active duty with the Regular Army in the grade of second
lieutenant. Only those who applied and who had been screened by the War
Department were eligible.[141]

Continuing to elaborate amendments to the National Defense Act,
Congress, in April 1938, established the requirement that line officers
should not be detailed to or remain as members of the General Staff
Corps unless two of their immediately preceding six years had been
served in actual command of or on duty other than General Staff duty,
with troops of one or more of the combatant arms or as instructor
with the National Guard, Organized Reserves, or Reserve Officers’
Training Corps.[142] Two days later in another amendment to the basic
act, Congress provided for establishment of a Regular Army Reserve,
membership in which was restricted to persons under 36 years of age who
had served in the Regular Army and from which an honorable discharge
had been received.[143] The Regular Army Reserve was subject to call
to active duty by the President in case of emergency declared by him.
Within six months after the termination of an emergency declared by the
President, the Reserve forces were to be placed in an inactive status
or discharged, whichever was the more appropriate.[144]

In June 1938 the 1916 statute was amended to increase the allowed
strength of enlisted men in the Army Air Corps from 16,000 to
21,500.[145] That same month an earlier Naval Reserve statute (Act of
February 28, 1925) was superseded and a Naval Reserve to consist of the
Fleet Reserve, the Organized Reserve, the Merchant Marine Reserve, and
the Volunteer Reserve was created. All were to constitute a component
part of the Navy.[146] The same Act also provided for a Marine Corps
Reserve.[147] The reserve units were to be composed of persons
transferred, enlisted, or appointed to them.[148]

But it is in 1940 that the statute books commence to reflect
administration and congressional anticipation of American participation
in the War and the attendant necessity to compel individuals to give
military service. On May 14, 1940 provision was made for the extension
of all enlistments in the active military service for the duration,
plus six months in the event of war or other emergency declared by
Congress.[149] The Secretary of the Navy was given power, six days
following Pearl Harbor, to extend for the duration of the war plus six
months all enlistments in the Navy, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard.[150]
Another enactment of that date permitted the similar extension of Army
service.[151] This Act also eliminated all territorial restrictions on
the use of units and members of the Army.[152]

Congress, having made provision for the extension of regular service
enlistments for the duration in the event of emergency, then granted
the President authority to call the reserve to active duty. This was
accomplished in August 1940 when Congress delegated to the President
power until June 30, 1942 to order into the active military service
for a twelve month period any or all members and units of any or all
reserve components of the Army of the United States, and retired
personnel of the Regular Army, with or without their consent, in
any manner the President deemed necessary for the strengthening
of the national defense.[153] The August statute having empowered
the President to order the National Guard, as well as other reserve
units, into active duty, it seemed desirable to equip the States with
authority to set up military units for home duty in the absence of the
Guard.

An October 1940 statute accomplished this purpose by authorizing the
states, while any part of the National Guard of the state concerned
was in active federal service, to organize and maintain whatever
military forces other than National Guard were believed necessary by
the state.[154] These forces were subject to the Secretary of War’s
regulation on matters of discipline and training. They were not subject
to federal call, but neither were individual members exempt by reason
of service in such units from military service under any federal law.
In September 1950, three months after outbreak of the Korean War,
Congress authorized the President to call up reserve forces and retired
personnel from all military branches, with or without the consent of
those called.[155] And, as in the Second World War, state authorities
were again empowered to set up military units to substitute for the
National Guard as long as any part of the National Guard was in active
federal service.[156]

Meanwhile the gradual inclusion of compulsory service provisions in
statutes was carried to its ultimate conclusion in the Selective
Training and Service Act of 1940.[157] The Act required the
registration of all male citizens of the United States and male alien
residents between the ages of 21 and 36.[158] The President was
authorized from time to time, whether or not a state of war existed, to
select and induct into the land and naval forces of the United States
for training and service whatever number of men in his judgment might
be required for such forces in the national interest.[159] A peacetime
ceiling of 900,000 inductees was established, and provision made for a
twelve months’ maximum training period subject to extension whenever
the Congress declared that the national interest was imperiled.[160]
The remaining powers granted to the President in the Act, and the
limitations which circumscribed his exercise of them, will be discussed
in other contexts.

By proclamation that day, and on October 1, 8, and November 12, the
President established registration days in the United States proper,
Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and Alaska.[161] A second registration day was
proclaimed in May 1941, and a third on January 5, 1942.[162] The
Conscription Act was continued in effect for the duration of the
war. A post-war, or “cold war”, conscription program was set up in
June 1948.[163] The new statute provided for the registration of
male citizens and alien residents between the ages of 18 and 26, and
made those between 19 and 26 subject to induction into the armed
forces at the discretion of the President.[164] He was empowered
to induct a sufficient number of persons to maintain the personnel
strengths of the armed forces at three million men.[165] The maximum
term of service was two years, and the Act’s duration was set at two
years. A September 1950 amendment to the Act allowed the President
to require special registration of medical, dental, and allied
specialties, drafting persons below the age of 50 from the lists to
fill requisitions submitted by the Department of Defense and approved
by the President.[166] An eleventh hour enactment of June 23, 1950
deferred expiration of the Selective Service Act for fifteen days,[167]
and seven days later July 9, 1951 was substituted for the July 9, 1950
expiration date.[168]

The next year saw systematic amendment of the 1948 statute, including
a change of title to the Universal Military Training and Service
Act.[169] The maximum of two years’ service was continued, and the
minimum age for both registration and induction set at 18-1/2 years.
A 1953 amendment to the Act provided for the special registration,
classification, and induction of medical, dental, and allied specialist
personnel.[170] A method for gaining release from military service,
anachronistic in the age of universal military service and the citizen
army, was removed when in July 1953 Congress repealed provisions
of 1890 and 1893 statutes which permitted enlisted men to purchase
discharge from the armed services.[171]

A series of non-coercive statutes from 1939 on were designed to augment
the armed services. In June 1939 Congress established a Coast Guard
Reserve, composed of owners of motorboats and yachts.[172] In March
1941 the President was empowered to appoint within the Navy 100 acting
assistant surgeons above previous quotas, and the Secretary of the
Navy given power in time of war or national emergency declared by the
President to appoint for temporary service, such acting assistant
surgeons as the exigencies of the service required.[173]

A June 1942 statute suspended all limitations on personnel strength in
the military services.[174] Upon emergence of the “Cold War” Congress
again authorized increases in military strength. In April 1946 the Navy
and Marine Corps were permitted to increase the number of commissioned
officers on the active list, and to maintain enlisted strength at
500,000 for the Regular Navy, and at 200,000 for the Marine Corps.[175]
A Civil Air Patrol, to serve as a volunteer civilian auxiliary to the
Air Force, was established in May 1948.[176] The Air Force was to
establish, maintain, supply, and equip liaison offices with the CAP,
and to detail Air Force military and civilian personnel to assist in
training CAP members. Not dissimilar to the provision establishing
the CAP as a civilian adjunct to the Air Force was a 1953 statute
authorizing the President to employ the American National Red Cross
under the Armed Forces whenever the President found it necessary to
order such employment.[177]

The Women’s Armed Services Integration Act of June 1948 integrated
the women’s services as Regular units within the Army, Navy, Marine
Corps, and Air Force.[178] Four years later Congress authorized
the appointment of qualified women as physicians and specialists
in the medical services of the Army, Navy, and Air Force.[179] In
1950 provision was made for the five year enlistment in the Regular
Army of 2,500 qualified unmarried male aliens.[180] Alien enlistees
were integrated into established units with citizen soldiers and not
segregated into separate organizations for aliens.


NEGATIVE INTEGRATION

It has become an axiom of democratic government that in time of
emergency threatening the health or safety of the community or the
territorial integrity of the nation, the objective of communal survival
takes precedence over the desires and conveniences of the individual.
The energies, wealth, talents of individuals may be conscripted in
the national interest. Democratic governments also have asserted the
right to constrict the range of permissible activities of individuals
whose freedom, if unlimited, is calculated to exacerbate the emergency.
Such limitations may apply to the population generally or to defined
segments of it. The intensity of such limitations may be measured on
a continuum ranging from precautionary detention to the relatively
mild requirement that persons in defined categories register with the
government.

_Preventive Detention_: At an early date Congress, with judicial
approval, exercised the power to apprehend and detain all enemy aliens.
On December 7, 1941, President Roosevelt issued the first of ten
wartime proclamations founded upon Congressional enactments of 1798 and
1918, imposing limitations upon the activities of enemy aliens, and
specifically announcing that “All aliens shall be liable to restraint,
or to give security,”[181] and that dangerous aliens might be
subjected to arrest and confinement. In two statutes enacted in 1952,
Congress reiterated its desire that illegal entrants be apprehended and
detained pending deportation. These statutes provided for the search
of vessels and arrest of persons seeking to enter the United States
illegally,[182] and authorized the establishment of necessary detention
facilities to hold those arrested.[183]

It is well known that in World War II persons of Japanese ancestry,
including even those possessed of American citizenship, were subjected
to preventive detention.[184] Presidential exercise of this form
of restraint is now sanctioned on a standby basis. Title II of the
Internal Security Act of 1950 empowers the President in time of
“Internal Security Emergency” to order the apprehension and detention
of persons “as to whom there is reasonable ground to believe that,” if
free, they “will engage in, or probably will conspire with others to
engage in, acts of espionage or of sabotage.”[185] The President may
declare a state of internal security emergency upon the invasion of the
United States or any of its territories or possessions, the declaration
of war by Congress, or insurrection within the United States in aid of
a foreign enemy.

_Access to the U.S. and U.S. Citizenship_: Closely related to the
detention of enemy aliens or others whose liberty is perceived to
endanger the security of the state is the control of access to the
United States and the acquisition of United States citizenship. By
Act of June 20, 1941[186] Congress instructed American diplomatic and
consular officers to refuse visas or entry permits to aliens believed
seeking entry into the United States for the purpose of engaging in
activities which would endanger the public safety. The following day
Congress granted the President power during the existing national
emergency to place restrictions and prohibitions in addition to those
already provided by law upon the departure of persons from and their
entry into the United States.[187] In proclamations of July and
September 1945 and April 1946, President Truman ordered the deportation
of enemy aliens resident in the United States without admission under
the immigration laws, or enemy aliens deemed dangerous to the public
peace and safety of the United States.[188]

In an earlier statute Congress excluded from admission to the United
States persons who have departed from the jurisdiction of the United
States for the purpose of evading or avoiding training or service in
the armed forces of the United States during time of war or during a
period declared by the President to be a period of national emergency.
Among the myriad restrictions of the Internal Security Act of 1950 are
to be found additional categories of aliens ineligible for entry into
the United States, principally aliens who at any time have been members
of the Communist or other totalitarian party of any state of the United
States, of any foreign state, or of any political or geographical
subdivision of any foreign state, and aliens who advocate the economic,
international, and governmental doctrines of world communism or of any
form of totalitarianism.[189]

Naturalization is refused or citizenship withdrawn from persons falling
into classifications created by a security-conscious Congress. The
Nationality Act of 1940[190] restricted the eligibility of alien
enemies for nationalization to those whose declaration of intention
was made not less than two years prior to the beginning of the state
of war and specified that enemy aliens were eligible for apprehension
and removal at any time previous to actual naturalization. Section 25
of the Internal Security Act amends the Nationality Act of 1940 to make
ineligible for naturalization persons subscribing to or giving evidence
of subscribing to anarchist, communist, or any totalitarian movement
or body of sentiment. Those who within the ten years next preceding
the filing of naturalization petitions, or in the period between such
filing and the time of taking the final oath of citizenship, have
been members of, or affiliated with, communist-front organizations
registered under the Subversive Activities Control Act of 1950,
must rebut a presumption that they are persons not attached to the
principles of the Constitution and thus ineligible for citizenship.[191]

Congress has devised appropriate means for handling the cases of
persons seeking to renounce American citizenship. To facilitate the
surrender of United States citizenship by persons of Japanese ancestry,
Congress in July, 1944, specified that with the permission of the
Attorney General, and when the United States is at war, citizens may
accomplish expatriation by the simple act of making in the United
States a formal written renunciation of nationality in such form as
may be prescribed by, and before an officer designated by the Attorney
General.[192] The assumption that persons departing from or remaining
outside of the jurisdiction of the United States in time of war for the
purpose of evading or avoiding military service renounce their American
citizenship was created by an Act of Congress in September, 1944.[193]

President Roosevelt by proclamation of July 1941 provided for
establishment of “The Proclaimed List of Certain Blocked Nationals” to
be published in the Federal Register. The list was to contain the names
of those persons deemed to be, or to have been, acting on behalf of
the interests of Germany and Italy. Any material or article exported
from the United States through the efforts of German and Italian
“blocked nationals” was declared to be detrimental to the interest of
national defense in the United States.[194] The Secretary of State,
acting in conjunction with the Secretary of the Treasury, the Attorney
General, the Secretary of Commerce, the Administrator of Export
Control, and the Coordinator of Commercial and Cultural Relations
between the American Republics was required to prepare the list.[195]

Persons naturalized after January 1, 1951 created a _prima facie_ case
that they were not attached to the principles of the Constitution of
the United States at the time of naturalization, if within five years
after naturalization they joined as a member or affiliated with any
organization, attachment to which would have precluded or hindered
naturalization in the first place. The unwary risked cancellation of
his citizenship for fraud if found to be connected with an organization
whose goals and objectives were directed against the United States.
This is one of the Internal Security Act provisions[196] designed
to exclude communists from naturalization. The Expatriation Act
of 1954 provides for the loss of nationality of persons (whether
natural born or naturalized citizens) convicted by a court or court
martial of committing treason against the United States, or engaging
in a conspiracy to overthrow, put down, or to destroy by force the
Government of the United States, or to levy war against them.[197]

_Circumscribing Movement of Persons_: The area of permissible mobility
is narrowed for all persons in time of war or emergency. The population
generally is excluded from specified security areas. By Act of January,
1938,[198] Congress authorized the President to define certain vital
military and naval installations or equipment and made it unlawful
to photograph or sketch such installations without proper authority.
This obviously limits access to and activity in areas adjacent to such
equipment. A 1950 amendment to the Civil Aeronautics Act, for example,
empowered the Secretary of Commerce, after consultation with the
Department of Defense and the Civil Aeronautics Board, to define zones
or areas in the airspace above the United States, its Territories,
and possessions as he may find necessary in the interests of national
security. The Secretary is also given authority to prohibit or restrict
flights of aircraft which he cannot effectively identify, locate, and
control in those areas.[199] Selected groups of persons, generally
enemy aliens, may be prohibited from entering or remaining in certain
areas of the country. Proclamation No. 2525, December 7, 1941,[200]
forbade the presence of alien Japanese in the Canal Zone, and
restricted their entry into, or departure from, Hawaii, the Philippine
Islands, and the United States, and provided for their exclusion from
designated areas. Of maximum severity were limitations on mobility
beyond the limits of a community, or confinement in a camp or cell. The
movement to restrict travel by Americans dates from the 1935 endeavor
of the American Congress to avoid American involvement in any future
conflict. Section 6 of the Neutrality Act of 1935[201] empowered the
President to prohibit or regulate travel by American citizens as
passengers on the vessels of any belligerents in a war in which the
United States was a neutral. Individuals travelling in violation of
orders did so at their own risk.

Two months after passage of the Neutrality Act, in October 1935,
President Roosevelt issued Proclamation No. 2142, applying Section 6
to the Ethiopian conflict, and ordering American citizens to refrain
from traveling as passengers on vessels of either belligerent. The May
1937 amendments to the Neutrality Act[202] strengthened this provision
by making it unlawful for any United States citizen to travel on
belligerent vessels in contravention of the President’s prohibition
or regulation of such travel. In 1939 these provisions were broadened
to include any American travelling on such a vessel as a member of
its crew,[203] and to prohibit American ships from carrying goods or
passengers to belligerent ports[204] or combat areas.

President Roosevelt’s Neutrality Proclamation of September 5, 1939,
among other things, prohibited Americans from accepting commissions
with belligerents, or enlisting in the service of a belligerent.
Hiring persons to enlist, or going beyond the jurisdiction of the
United States with the intent to join belligerent forces, were also
prohibited.[205]

By Act of March 28, 1940,[206] Congress extended application of an
earlier prohibition[207] on unauthorized entry on military reservations
to the outlying possessions of the United States. A year later it
granted the Secretaries of War and Navy, jointly or singly, power to
define areas within such reasonable distance of any military or naval
camp or station in which prostitution would be prohibited by federal
law.

By Proclamation of December 27, 1941 President Roosevelt established
the Hawaiian Maritime Control Area, and regulated entry, radio calls,
visual communications, and traffic in that area. Naval authorities were
granted power to establish supplementary regulation.[208] Subsequently,
the President established Maritime Control Areas for Cristobal and the
Gulf of Panama,[209] Boston,[210] San Francisco, Columbia River, Puget
Sound, Southeastern Alaska, and other areas.[211] On May 20, 1942,
invoking his powers as Commander-in-Chief, the President established
the Padre Island Sea Range Area, and imposed regulations controlling
entry to an activity in that area. The next day he signed into law
an enactment providing a maximum penalty of $5,000 fine and one year
imprisonment for knowingly violating restrictions established by the
President, the Secretary of War, or military commanders designated by
him, on entering, remaining in, leaving, or committing proscribed acts
in military areas or zones.[212]

The areas thus far described were defined principally for exclusionary
purposes. It is not unusual to define areas with a view to confining
therein specific persons or categories of persons. Invoking a 1909
statute, the President on September 5, 1939 made it illegal for
interned members of the armed forces of belligerent nations to
leave the jurisdiction of the United States, or the limits of their
internment, without permission.[213] In a later proclamation the
President stipulated that no alien would be permitted to depart from
the United States if the Secretary of State were satisfied that the
alien’s departure would be prejudicial to the interests of the United
States.[214]

Section 6 of the Internal Security Act of 1950 makes it illegal for
members of an organization which has registered under the Act as a
communist organization or has been ordered to do so by the Subversive
Activities Control Board, to apply for a passport, or to use or
attempt to use a passport. It is also an offense for a federal officer
knowingly to issue a passport to such a person. The Immigration and
Nationality Act also empowers the President, in time of war or national
emergency, to impose restrictions and prohibitions upon the departure
of persons from the United States.[215]

_Registration_: The requirement that specified categories of
individuals register, in consequence of their backgrounds,
associations, or activities, or as a result of possession of certain
articles, becomes increasingly familiar in the United States.
Legislative motivation in requiring such registration may be varied
and complex. The registration provision invariably provides the basis
for defining new crimes and therefore opportunity to prosecute persons
whose backgrounds, activities and beliefs are anathema to powerful
groups in the nation. Combined with periodic reporting, registration
may act as a deterrent to the commission of certain acts considered
socially or politically undesirable. It may simply facilitate the
informative function of government, enabling authorities to become
aware of and continuously check upon the activities of selected groups
of persons affecting the public interest. Or, registration may serve
as a mild, yet nonetheless effective, restraint upon the freedom of
individuals. Certainly, for example, it is an essential prerequisite to
paroling enemy aliens in time of war, although its usefulness is not
limited to wartime only.

The decade prior to the Second World War is popularly, and accurately,
perceived as one of sustained economic emergency. During the second
half of this decade the Congress frequently was preoccupied with
the need for legislation designed to protect the United States from
involvement in another world war. The Neutrality Act of 1935[216]
referred to above contained a registration feature. Under the terms
of that Act, every person engaged in the business of manufacturing,
exporting, or importing any arms, ammunition, and implements of war was
required to register within ninety days of entering such a business.
Such individuals or firms had to provide the Secretary of State with a
$500 registration fee, and information including personal or business
name, principal place of business, places of business in the United
States, and a list of the arms, ammunition and other implements of war
which they handled. They were also required to inform the Secretary of
State of any changes, and had to keep permanent records of business
transactions which were subject to the scrutiny of the National
Munitions Control Board.[217] The registration provision was retained
in the May 1937 amendment to the Neutrality Act with very little
change.[218]

In June 1938 Congress chose to compel registration of persons employed
by agencies to disseminate propaganda in the United States.[219] Every
person then acting as an agent for a foreign principal was given thirty
days after the Act went into effect to register with the Secretary of
State. His registration statement, under oath, required the agent’s
name and address, the name and address of his principal, and a copy of
the contract or oral agreement covering the agent’s services, including
compensation. The agent was also to file a copy of the charter as
well as a statement of the objectives of the organization employing
him.[220] The term “agent of a foreign principal” was rather broad
and included any person who acted or engaged or agreed to act as a
public-relations counsel or publicity agent for a foreign principal
or for any domestic organization subsidized directly or indirectly
in whole or in part by a foreign principal.[221] New information
statements were to be filed each six months. Failure to file and the
making of false statements were punishable by a maximum of $1,000 fine
and two years’ imprisonment.[222]

Six months prior to Pearl Harbor, Congress enacted the Alien
Registration Act, requiring all aliens fourteen years of age or older
and remaining in the United States for thirty days or more, to apply
for registration and be fingerprinted at post offices and other places
to be designated by the Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization.
Parents must register for aliens under fourteen.[223] Alien registrants
who were residents of the United States were required to notify the
Commissioner in writing of each change of residence and new address
within five days from the date of such change. All others were to
notify him of their addresses at the expiration of each three months’
period of residence in the United States.[224] And by Proclamation No.
2537, January 14, 1942,[225] the President ordered all alien enemies
within the continental United States, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin
Islands to apply for and acquire certificates of identification.

In the Spring of 1942 the Foreign Agents Registration Act was adapted
to changed conditions. Congress announced its purpose to protect the
national defense, internal security, and foreign relations of the
United States by requiring public disclosure by persons engaging
in propaganda activities and other activities. Anyone acting for
or on behalf of a foreign government, foreign political party or
other foreign principal would be identified and the Government
and the American people would be in a better position to appraise
their statements and actions in the light of their associations and
activities.[226] In addition to elaborating the definition of a foreign
principal, the Act specified numerous exemptions from its registration
provisions. Agents whose foreign principals were governments, the
defense of which was deemed by the President to be vital to the defense
of the United States, were not required to register provided their
activities were not intended to conflict with any of the domestic or
foreign policies of the Government of the United States.[227]

A related statute of October, 1940 also compelled certain groups
to register with the Attorney General.[228] Four categories of
organizations were required to register: (1) Organizations subject to
foreign control and engaging in political activity, (2) Organizations
engaging both in civilian-military activity and in political activity,
(3) Those subject to foreign control and engaging in civilian-military
activity, and (4) Any organization one of whose aims was the overthrow
of a government or subdivision thereof by force or violence.[229]
By political activity Congress had reference to activity aimed at
the control by force or overthrow of the Government of the United
States or any of its subdivisions.[230] An organization, according
to the statute, was engaged in civilian-military activity if it gave
or received instruction in the use of firearms or other weapons, or
participated, with or without arms, in military maneuvers, drills or
parades of a military or naval character. And an organization was
deemed subject to foreign control if its financial support was derived
directly or indirectly from a foreign government, or if its policy was
determined by, or at the suggestion of, or in collaboration with, a
foreign government.[231]

The registration statements were to contain the name and address
of the organization, the names of officers and contributors, the
qualifications for membership, organizational aims, assets, income, and
activities. Violation of the Act might entail a fine of $10,000 and
five years’ imprisonment.

The Internal Security Act of 1950 contains provisions similar to the
older wartime law. Briefly stated, the Act defines “communist-action”
and “communist-front” organizations, which together comprise a
class of communist organizations.[232] Such organizations are
compelled to register with the Attorney General, filing, in the case
of communist-front organizations, a list of officers at time of
registration and in the preceding twelve months; and, in the case of
communist-action organizations, a list of officers and members for
the preceding twelve months.[233] A complete financial accounting is
required and current information must be supplied in annual reports.

In July 1954 Congress amended the reporting provision to require
a listing, in such form and detail as the Attorney General might
prescribe, of all printing presses and machines used or intended to
be used by a communist-action or communist-front organization. The
statute went so far as to require registration of any printing machine
used by an organization in which the communists or affiliates had
an interest.[234] Adequate procedural protection and provision for
judicial review is afforded those charged with failure to register.[235]

The Communist Control Act of 1954 amplified the Internal Security
Act. It purports to be an Act to outlaw the Communist Party and to
prohibit members of communist organizations from serving in certain
representative capacities, and for other purposes. Despite its title,
the Act does not outlaw the Communist Party in the sense of making
membership in it illegal and proscribing its existence. It simply
deprives the Communist Party of certain rights, privileges and
immunities attendant upon legal bodies created under the jurisdiction
of the laws of the United States or any political subdivision
thereof.[236] The Act then defines a new species within the genus
communist organization.[237] In effect it amends the Internal Security
Act by setting up the trilogy; communist-action, communist-front,
and communist-infiltrated organizations. And communist-infiltrated
organizations--a euphemism for communist dominated trade unions must
register.[238] Such organizations are ineligible to act as collective
bargaining representatives and are deprived of access to the National
Labor Relations Board.[239]

The Act makes it illegal for any member of a communist organization,
which either has registered with the Attorney General or been ordered
to register by the Subversive Activities Control Board, “to hold office
or employment with any labor organization, ... or to represent any
employer in any matter proceeding arising or pending under the National
Labor Relations Act.”[240]

_Freedom of Association_: The Communist Control Act of 1954 and the
registration provisions of the Internal Security Act might well have
been subsumed under the classification freedom of association. Both
have grave implications for the freedom of individuals to associate at
will and according to conscience with political and economic groups.
And similarly far-reaching in implication for this traditional freedom
are those provisions which, going one step further than stipulating
disqualifications for office-holding in representative associations,
prohibit the creation of an employer-employee relationship, or
facilitate the disruption of such relationships where they already
exist.

The wheel has taken a full turn since the American Congress in 1937
repealed a District of Columbia Appropriation Act provision that no
part of any appropriation for the public schools would be available
for the payment of the salary of any person teaching or advocating
communism.[241] Today, of course, the trend is toward maximizing
the political disqualifications for public and private employment.
This trend can be traced from the pre-war efforts of the Congress to
prevent penetration of defense industries and government agencies by
subversives.

We look first to legal efforts to exclude persons conceived to be
subversive from private employment, and then survey the statutes
governing public employment. The Defense Production Act of June 21,
1940,[242] for example, imposed the rule that aliens working for
a defense contractor whose contract involved access to classified
information were ineligible to work for the contractor. If, however,
the head of the government agency for whom secret work was being
performed gave the contractor written consent to use aliens, the
contractor was free to do so.

Attempting to insure that employment opportunities created by the
induction of young men into the service did not accrue to members
of groups then opposing the American defense effort, Congress, in
enacting the Selective Training and Service Act of 1940, stipulated
that whenever a vacancy was caused in the employment rolls of any
business or industry by reason of an employee’s induction into the
Armed Services of the United States, the vacancy could not be filled by
any person then a member of the Communist Party or the German-American
Bund.[243] Ten days after Pearl Harbor, restraints were placed on the
liberty of maritime employers to hire radio operators for service on
American flag vessels. For the duration of war emergency it became
unlawful to employ any person to serve as radio operator aboard any
vessel (other than a vessel of foreign registry) if the Secretary of
the Navy (1) had disapproved such employment for any specified voyage,
route, or area of operation, and (2) had notified the master of the
vessel of such disapproval prior to the vessel’s departure.[244]

Since the war, no less significant prohibitions have been placed on
public or private employment of members of communist organizations.
The effect thereof will be determined by the success of the Subversive
Activities Control Board in compelling the registration of such groups.
Section 5 of the Internal Security Act of 1950 makes it illegal for
members of registered communist organizations to conceal or fail to
disclose such membership in seeking or accepting any employment in any
defense facility, as defined and listed by the Secretary of Defense.
This provision was extended to make illegal defense employment for
members of registered “Communist action” groups.[245]

It may be noted that the Butler Bill of April 1955 would have empowered
the President to establish procedures for screening any person in
defense employment “as to whom there is reasonable cause to believe may
engage in sabotage, espionage, or other subversive acts.” This process
of screening also would be applied to firms seeking or holding defense
contracts. Thus, increasingly access of private firms to government
contracts as well as access of individuals to jobs under such
contracts, which today may be the staff of life, is being restricted.
Contributing to this trend is the provision in the Rubber Producing
Facilities Disposal Act of 1953 that purchase proposals shall not be
accepted from any person who has not identified his principal, or is
not financially responsible, or is a poor security risk.[246]

Freedom of employees to strike defense industries or to engage in
so-called emergency strikes has on occasion been severely limited. The
War Labor Disputes Act of 1943 required that the government be given
notice of labor disputes, and that production continue for a period
of thirty days after notice of intention to strike. A secret ballot
of employees had to be conducted prior to calling a strike.[247] The
President was granted ultimate power to seize plants if necessary to
avoid interruption of war production occasioned by labor disputes,
and interference with government operation of such plants was made
illegal.[248] The plants were to be operated under the terms and
conditions of employment which were in effect at the time possession
was taken by the government.[249]

In the post-war Labor-Management Relations Act a national emergency
strike is defined as one imperiling “the national health or
safety.”[250] When, in the opinion of the President, a threatened
or existing strike or lockout affecting an entire industry or a
substantial part thereof imperils the national health or safety, he
may appoint a board of inquiry to inquire into the issues involved in
the dispute and to make a written report to him within such time as he
shall prescribe.[251] When the President has received a report from
a board of inquiry, he may direct the Attorney General to petition
any district court of the United States having jurisdiction of the
parties to enjoin such strike or lockout or its continuance, and if the
court finds that a threatened or actual strike or lockout (1) affects
an entire industry or a substantial part thereof engaged in trade,
commerce, transportation, transmission, or engaged in the production of
goods for commerce; and (2) if permitted to occur or to continue, will
imperil the national health or safety, it shall have jurisdiction to
enjoin any such strike or lockout.[252]

The President will be advised of such a strike or lockout sufficiently
in advance of its occurrence because Section 8 (d) of the Act requires
60 days’ written notice of termination or modification of a collective
bargaining contract, and notification of the Federal Mediation and
Conciliation Service and equivalent state or territorial services
within thirty days after such notice of the existence of a dispute.[253]

Looking to restrictions upon federal employment, it is convenient
to begin with 1940, the year in which, in an effort to expedite the
strengthening of the national defense, Congress gave the Secretary of
War limited power to remove army civil service employees for security
reasons. The Secretary might remove from the classified civil service
of the United States any employee of the Military Establishment
forthwith if he found that such person had been guilty of conduct
inimical to the public interest in the defense program of the United
States, and if the person terminated had received notice of the
charges.[254] Discharged employees were given the opportunity within
thirty days of removal to answer charges in writing and to submit
affidavits in support of written answers.[255]

Great discretion was permitted the civilian heads of the armed services
in promoting or demoting regular officers during wartime, and as early
as July 29, 1941 the President signed a Joint Resolution giving the
Secretary of War power during the time of the national emergency to
remove any officer from the active list of the Regular Army. The only
restriction on the exercise of this power was that a comparison of the
officer’s performance-of-duty record with those of his fellow officers
would be made. But retention in or dismissal from the active list, of
any officer, ultimately could be determined by the Secretary,[256]
even though affected officers were guaranteed a hearing before a board
of not less than five general officers prior to separation.[257]
Supplementing this was the provision that no payment could be made from
money appropriated in the Act to any officer on the retired list of the
Army who, for himself or for others, was engaged in the selling or the
sale of any war materials or supplies either to the Army or the War
Department.[258]

Since 1950 it has become common practice for the Congress to attach to
appropriation bills the provision that no salary or wages will be paid
from any appropriation to an individual who either asserts the right to
strike against the Government or belongs to an employees’ organization
asserting this right. And no monies will be paid to an individual
who advocates or is a member of an organization that advocates the
overthrow of the Government of the United States.[259] The Defense
Production Act of 1950 contained this type of provision.[260] It
further provided that an affidavit shall be _prima facie_ evidence
that the person making it has acted contrary to the statute.[261]
Agencies also have been delegated broad power to suspend employees
deemed security risks. An August, 1950 statute permitted the heads
of the State, Commerce, Defense, Justice, and Treasury Departments,
the Secretaries of the Army, Navy and Air Force, and others, in their
absolute discretion and when deemed necessary in the interest of the
national security, to suspend, without pay, any civilian official or
employee.[262] Following notice and an opportunity to the suspended
employee to submit statements and affidavits, and after investigation
and review by the employing agency, his employment might be terminated
as necessary or advisable in the interest of the national security.
Since the employee is informed of the reasons for his suspension only
to the extent that such agency head determines that the interests
of the national security permit, he may encounter difficulty in
formulating his defense.

Interestingly enough while military emergency may be assigned as
justifiable for banning or terminating employment of persons on the
basis of their political affiliations, Congress has recognized that
other kinds of emergency may require temporary suspension of such
disqualifications to federal employment. The Department of Interior
Appropriation Act of 1948 provided that in cases of emergency, caused
by fire, flood, storm, act of God, or sabotage, persons might be
employed for periods of not more than thirty days and be paid salaries
and wages without the necessity of inquiring into their membership in
any organization.

_Traditional Procedural Rights of Individuals_: Whether justifiable
or not, in time of crisis encroachment upon the traditional rights
and privileges of individuals invariably has been recorded. The
Compulsory Testimony Act of August, 1954[263] may be an example of
such legislation. It enables Congressional Committees in a limited
number of instances to solicit the courts in compelling testimony from
recalcitrant witnesses who have invoked their constitutional privilege
against self-incrimination. Suspension of this constitutional safeguard
is achieved by the immunity from prosecution accorded the witness under
the terms of this measure. As to the scope of the immunity therein
afforded, it is not in excess of that granted in laws previously
enacted, notably the following: Interstate Commerce Act, Sherman
Anti-Trust Act, Securities Exchange Act, Communications Act, National
Labor Relations Act, Motor Carrier Act, Federal Power Act, Public
Utility Holding Company Act, Industrial Alcohol Act, Merchant Marine
Act, Bituminous Coal Act, Natural Gas Act, Civil Aeronautics Act,
Fair Labor Standards Act, Railroad Unemployment Insurance Act, Social
Security Act, Investment Company Act, Investment Advisers Act, Second
War Powers Act, and Emergency Price Control Act, 1942. See a more
extended listing in _Shapiro_ v. _U.S._[264]

Emergency entails restraints upon the freedom of individuals to
manipulate their property and to act as they please. Not only does
the government, as has been noted, seize factories and mines, but can
compel acceptance of government orders.




CHAPTER V GOVERNMENTAL ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY


In recent years the federal government has set up programs for the
acquisition or disposition of productive facilities and natural
resources. These programs have had various objectives, as for example
the acquisition in conjunction with its parity payments policy of
surplus agricultural commodities. Later acquisition programs, justified
in terms of national defense, include the following: stockpiling of
strategic raw materials; acquisition of land and equipment for military
sites and for federally-owned productive facilities; the lending or
leasing of federally-owned productive equipment to private producers;
and the acquisition of plants and raw and finished materials incidental
to enforcement of emergency control programs.


STOCKPILING

The Government may acquire natural resources in an effort to stockpile
for defense purposes, in the course of expanding the military
establishments or governmentally owned productive facilities, or it
may acquire such resources to facilitate a privately financed defense
project. This last purpose sometimes leads the Government to lend its
power of eminent domain to private business concerns.

In June 1939 Congress assigned to the Secretary of the Interior and the
Army and Navy Munitions Board the task of determining which materials
are strategic and critical to American defense, and provided for
acquisition of stocks of these materials.[265] Congress also encouraged
the development of mineral resources within the United States. Two
months later Congress approved the exchange of surplus agricultural
commodities held by the Commodity Credit Corporation for stocks of
strategic and critical materials produced abroad.[266] Under the
fiscal 1941 Appropriations Act, the Navy Department obtained funds for
procurement of strategic and critical materials in accordance with
the Act of June 7, 1939.[267] In this statute, and in a July 1940 Act
to expedite the strengthening of the national defense, the President
also was authorized to expend large sums on acquisition of such
materials.[268]

The Defense Production Act of 1950 empowers the President to make
provision either for purchases of, or commitments to purchase metals
and other raw materials, including liquid fuels. The government may use
the acquired items or offer them for resale. The same Act also empowers
the President to encourage the exploration, development, and mining of
critical and strategic minerals and metals.[269] The Mutual Security
Act of 1951 also provides sustenance for the stockpiling program.
The Director for Mutual Security is authorized to initiate projects
designed to increase production and help in obtaining raw materials in
which deficiencies exist among the United States’ free world allies.
The purpose of aiding recipients of American aid to develop their own
stockpiling program of critical materials is to reduce the steady drain
on United States resources.[270] The power of condemnation was added
to the power of requisitioning granted in the 1950 Defense Production
Act when Congress in a 1951 amendment empowered the President in
the interest of national defense, and when deemed necessary by him,
to acquire materials needed by the government. Acquisition may be
by transfer, donation, purchase, or, if needed, properly instituted
judicial proceedings.[271]

The Domestic Minerals Program Extension Act of 1953 sought to reduce
American dependence on overseas sources of supply for strategic or
critical minerals and metals during periods of threatening world
conflict.[272] This was to be accomplished through a united effort
on the part of each department and agency of the government having
responsibility for the discovery, development, production, and
acquisition of strategic or critical minerals and metals in order to
decrease further and to eliminate where possible the dependency of the
United States on overseas sources of supply of each such material.[273]
The Act extended for an additional two years the termination dates of
all purchase programs designed to stimulate the domestic production
of tungsten, manganese, chromite, mica, asbestos, beryl, and
columbium-tantalum-bearing ores and concentrates and established by
regulations issued pursuant to the Defense Production Act of 1950.[274]


MILITARY SITES AND PRODUCTIVE FACILITIES

Scattered through the statute books, of course, are numerous
authorizations to defense agencies to acquire land for specific
projects. For example, a July 1939 statute authorized the Secretary
of War to acquire fourteen described plots,[275] and a May 1949
statute authorized the Secretary of the Air Force to establish a joint
long-range proving ground for guided missiles and other weapons and
to acquire lands and rights necessary to set up the project.[276] An
Act of 1951 authorized the Secretary of the Navy to enlarge existing
water-supply facilities for the San Diego, California area for the
purpose of insuring the existence of an adequate water supply for
naval installations and defense production plants in that area.[277]
Of equal, if not greater significance than the scope of the delegation
contained therein are the provisions for extension of Congressional
control set-out in these authorizations for acquisition of specific
items.

In the Second War Powers Act, breadth of Congressional delegation
rather than intensity of control is the dominant fact. For example, the
President was authorized to permit the Secretaries of War and Navy,
or any other officer, board or commission, to acquire real property
by any means necessary, including condemnation, to insure its use by
the Government when needed.[278] Immediate possession might be taken
after filing of a condemnation petition.[279] Among the many powers
granted to the Federal Civil Defense Administrator in the 1951 statute
creating the FCDA was that of procuring by condemnation or otherwise,
constructing, or leasing materials and facilities.[280]

Because they are extremely scarce or non-existent in their natural
state in the United States, a few elements or other commodities have
been the object of intensive government efforts to either directly
produce them on a full scale, or to encourage private production by
acquiring and transferring to private firms certain of the assets
requisite to production. These are nitrogen, helium gas, fuels, rubber,
synthetic liquid and abaca (a plant the fiber of which is used in
making hemp).[281] Thus the Board of Directors of the Tennessee Valley
Authority were given power to exercise the right of eminent domain[282]
and to make and sell fixed nitrogen and fertilizers with the specific
injunction that it maintain in stand-by condition suitable facilities
for the production of explosives in the event of war or a national
emergency.[283] The plant might be used for the fixation of nitrogen
for agricultural purposes or leased, as long as conversion to war
production could be made quickly. The TVA of course was authorized to
produce and sell electric power,[284] but the government reserved the
right in case of war or national emergency declared by Congress to
preempt TVA-produced electricity as well as nitrogen.[285] The Helium
Gas Conservation Act of 1937 authorized the Secretary of the Interior,
through the Bureau of Mines, to acquire lands, and acquire or construct
such plants as were necessary to establish a federal monopoly of helium.

In 1942 the Secretary of Agriculture was authorized to construct or
operate factories for the growth and processing of guayule and other
rubber-bearing plants.[286] In 1947 Congress proclaimed the continued
existence of a short supply of rubber, a highly strategic and critical
material needed for the common defense and which cannot, in its natural
state, be grown in the United States. It reaffirmed the policy that
there shall be maintained at all times in the interest of the national
security and common defense, in addition to stock piles of natural
rubber, a technologically advanced and rapidly expandable domestic
rubber-producing industry. To this end, the powers of the United States
to manufacture and sell synthetic rubber were to continue in force
and the government would retain at least the minimum copolymer plant
capacity to produce “not less than six hundred thousand long tons per
year.”[287] A year later, in March 1948, a policy of reliance upon the
development of a free, competitive synthetic-rubber industry and the
termination of government production was enunciated, the President
to exercise certain powers of control to insure the existence of an
extensive government demand for domestic synthetic-rubber.[288]

The synthetic liquid fuels program was established in 1944. The
Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Bureau of Mines, was
authorized to develop and maintain one or more demonstration plants
to produce synthetic liquid fuels from coal, oil shale, and other
substances, and one or more demonstration plants to produce liquid
fuels from agricultural and forestry products. The Bureau of Mines
would also develop all facilities and accessories for the manufacture,
purification, storage, and distribution of the products.[289] Unlike
the other plans for production of essential defense elements or
commodities, this program was not designed directly to meet a major
portion of defense needs for the commodity produced. Rather, the plants
were to be of the minimum size which would allow the government to
furnish industry with the necessary cost and engineering data for the
development of a synthetic liquid-fuel industry.[290]

In the Abaca Production Act of 1950, Congress declared that abaca,
a hard fiber used in the making of marine and other cordage, is a
highly strategic and critical material which cannot be produced
in commercial quantities in the continental United States, and of
which an adequate supply is vital to the industrial and military
requirements for the common defense of the United States.[291] The
federal government was therefore to continue the program for the
production and sale of abaca in which it was engaged at the termination
of hostilities and to encourage abaca production throughout the world.
The total acreage produced by the government was not to exceed fifty
thousand, fluctuating below that upper limit at the discretion of the
President.[292]

The year of Dunkirk witnessed a number of Congressional authorizations
to the Executive to acquire and either directly utilize, or pass on
to private enterprise, material of war, or productive equipment and
facilities. In mid-1940 the President was given power to authorize the
Secretary of War to manufacture in factories and arsenals under his
jurisdiction, or otherwise procure, coast-defense and anti-aircraft
material, including ammunition therefor, on behalf of any American
Republic. He might also establish repair facilities for such
equipment.[293] This was shortly extended to manufacturing for the
government of any country whose defense the President deemed vital to
the defense of the United States.[294] Later in 1940 he was authorized
to requisition and take over for use of the United States any military
or naval equipment or munitions which had been ordered for export, but
which then could no longer be exported. Certain items of a military
nature could not, for example, be sent to France once the Germans had
occupied that country. The President could dispose of such material to
a private corporation or individual if such action was deemed to be
in the public interest.[295] The June 30, 1942 termination date was
moved forward to June 30, 1944, and the President’s power enlarged to
requisition in the interest of national defense or prosecution of war
in July 1942.[296]

In June 1940 the Secretary of the Navy was authorized to provide
necessary construction facilities or manufacturing plants on federal
land or elsewhere, and to man them with federal employees or otherwise
whenever he found it impossible to make contracts or to secure
facilities for procurement or construction of items authorized in
connection with national defense.[297] By October 1941 this authority
had grown to a general authorization to the President, that if he
found that the use of any military or naval equipment, supplies,
or munitions, or machinery, tools, or materials necessary for the
manufacture, servicing and operation of such equipment, were needed
for the defense of the United States the President could requisition
such property. Only two conditions prevailed: first, that the need
was immediate and impending, and second, that just compensation was
paid to the owners. The original expiration date of June 30, 1943 was
later changed to June 30, 1944.[298] But long before the Second World
War, Congress gave the President authority to requisition merchant
vessels. In Section 902 (a) of the Merchant Marine Act of 1936 the
government reserved the right to requisition any vessel documented
under the laws of the United States, during any national emergency
declared by proclamation of the President.[299] In authorizing the
President to utilize the power of eminent domain to acquire land needed
for pipe-line construction by private firms, Congress provided that
in the event it was impracticable for any private person promptly and
satisfactorily to construct such lines, the President could provide
for the construction by such department as he might designate.[300]
The government thus was privileged to go into the pipe-line business,
constructing and operating defense needed pipe-lines. Among the
prerogatives which Congress made available to the Secretary of the
Navy for purposes of insuring adequacy of maritime salvage operations
during the war, was that of acquiring such vessels and equipment as he
might deem necessary therefor.[301] The Secretary also was empowered
to transfer, by charter or otherwise, such equipment for operation by
private salvage companies.

The Defense Production Act of 1950 gave the President powers virtually
equal to those granted by Congress to the President in 1941. Again the
President was empowered to requisition needed materials for the defense
of the United States.[302] And in July 1953 the three armed service
secretaries were empowered to acquire, construct, establish, expand,
rehabilitate or convert industrial plants, either publicly or privately
owned, as might be needed for the defense of the United States. The
statutory language followed the familiar prescription that acquisition
could be by purchase, donation, lease, condemnation or otherwise as
necessary.[303]


FACILITATING ACQUISITION BY PRIVATE ENTERPRISES

In July 1941 Congress used the power of eminent domain to facilitate
the construction of public utilities for defense purposes.[304] Upon
finding that the construction of any pipe-line for the transportation
and/or distribution of petroleum or petrol products moving in
interstate commerce was or might be necessary for national-defense
purposes, the President was permitted to acquire such land or interest
in land, including rights-of-way or easements, by the exercise of the
right of eminent domain, as, in his opinion might be necessary.[305]
The President invoked this Act on a number of occasions.[306]

The Second War Powers Act earlier mentioned not only authorized the
acquisition of real property by the Secretaries of War and Navy or
their agents, but permitted them to dispose of such property or
interest therein by sale, lease or otherwise.[307] The Small Business
Concerns Mobilization Act of June 1942 empowered the Smaller War Plants
Corporation, established under the Act,[308] to purchase or lease
land, to purchase, lease, build, or expand plants, and to purchase or
produce equipment, facilities, machinery, materials, or supplies, as
might be needed to enable the Corporation to provide small business
concerns with the means and facilities to engage in the production of
war materials.[309] The Corporation could also enter into contracts
with the United States government and any department, agency, or
officer of the government having procurement powers and obligate the
Corporation to furnish articles, equipment, supplies, or materials to
the government.


AVAILABILITY OF FEDERALLY OWNED PROPERTY TO PRIVATE ENTERPRISE

Actually no clean demarcation can be made between this and the
preceding section. A graduation can be established, moving from
statutes lending the power of eminent domain to private enterprise,
to those emphasizing government acquisition and lending or leasing,
and ultimately to those principally concerned with providing
government-owned equipment to private enterprise--the equipment
presumably already in the hands of the government or subject to
acquisition under other statues.

One of the very first Acts to provide for placing educational
production of munitions of war stipulated that initial orders placed
with any person, firm, or corporation for supplying such munitions,
accessories, or parts, could include a complete set of such gages,
dies, jigs, tools, fixtures, and other special aids and appliances,
including drawings as needed for the production of munitions in
quantity in the event of emergency.[310] The title to all such
facilities was to remain in the government of the United States. The
fiscal 1941 Navy Department Appropriations Act granted the Navy funds
to furnish Government-owned facilities at privately owned plants,[311]
and a July 1940 Act to expedite the strengthening of the national
defense accorded like authority to the President.[312] Section 303 (a)
(d) of the Defense Production Act of 1950 gave the President a general
power to purchase raw materials including liquid fuels for government
use or for resale, and when in his judgment it would aid the national
defense, to install government-owned equipment in plants, factories,
and other industrial facilities owned by private persons.[313]


ACQUISITIONS INCIDENTAL TO ENFORCEMENT OF A CONTROL PROGRAM

Of the acquisition statutes hitherto discussed, most required that
an effort be made to negotiate a fair price with the individual or
concern whose property was acquired and, failing that, recourse might
be had to eminent domain proceedings. By the terms of the latter,
private entrepreneurs or investors in effect are confronted with the
option of utilizing their property in conformity with the Government’s
mobilization program or, in lieu thereof, of relinquishing it to the
Government. The statutes now to be considered sanction acquisition of
private property in those cases in which the owners or operators are
not managing it to the Government’s satisfaction.

A June 1940 Act to expedite national defense empowered the Secretary
of the Navy, under the general direction of the President, whenever he
deemed any existing manufacturing plant or facility necessary for the
national defense, and whenever he was unable to arrive at an agreement
with the owner of any such plant or facility for its use or operation,
to take over and operate such plant or facility either by Government
personnel or by contract with private firms.[314] The Selective
Training and Service Act of 1940 authorized the President, acting
through the Secretaries of War or Navy, to take immediate possession
of any plant or plants which in the opinion of the Secretary of War or
the Secretary of the Navy were capable of being readily geared to war
production. This drastic action came only when the owners refused to
give to the United States preference in the matter of the execution of
orders, or refused to manufacture the kind, quantity, or quality of
arms or ammunition, or who refused to furnish the materials demanded at
a reasonable price.[315]

The War Labor Disputes Act gave the President a similar power to
seize struck industries. It might be exercised with respect to any
plant, mine, or facility equipped for the manufacture, production,
or mining of any articles or materials which might be required for
the war effort, or which might be useful in connection therewith.
But a presidential finding was necessary first, that there was an
interruption of the operation of the plant, mine, or facility as a
result of a strike or other labor disturbance, and that the war effort
would be unduly impeded or delayed by the interruption, and that the
exercise of such power and authority was necessary to insure operation
in the interest of the war effort.[316]

Not, perhaps, punitive in its object, but nonetheless related to
enforcement of a control program, was the provision of the Emergency
Price Control Act of 1942, permitting the Price Administrator to buy
or sell commodities and goods or grant subsidies to assure necessary
production.[317]




CHAPTER VI REGULATION OF PROPERTY


We have seen that the effort to rationalize the national economy in
time of economic or war emergency may lead democratic governments
to assert a power to acquire the raw materials of production and
productive facilities. This power of acquisition may be designed or
exercised as a sanction for the coercion of “co-operation” upon the
part of the private units of the economy, or it may express the finding
that particular stockpiling or production functions can only, or most
efficiently be conducted by public agencies.

Significant as may be the readiness of democratic governments in time
of critical economic or crucial war emergency to enter the market
place or to produce, either to the exclusion of private enterprises
or in competition with them, these are exceptional circumstances;
rationalization of the economy is principally achieved by coercing
private owners and producers to act consistently with a governmental
definition of the public interest. It is such examples of direct
governmental control of private entrepreneurs, producers, and
distributors that are to be examined in this chapter.


CONTROL OF GOODS AND MATERIALS

In surveying the possible alternatives of a nation aware of a
threatened or existing shortage of strategic raw materials or finished
products it is appropriate to review first negative and general
controls and thereafter to consider those which become increasingly
particular and positive. An initial precautionary move in such
circumstances is to prevent the escape of scarce materials from
the country. Also relevant thereto is the conservation of domestic
supplies. Beyond conservation, implementing these safeguards are
affirmative programs encouraging increased domestic production of such
materials as well as their importation from abroad. Such programs have
been reviewed under the heading of government acquisition. It will
be recalled that in addition to stockpiling strategic materials, the
government created and operated new productive facilities in an effort
to insure adequate supply. However, in addition to these measures
the government generally has been unable to escape the necessity of
establishing priorities and allocations systems to insure that whatever
supply is available is utilized for successful prosecution of the war
or to combat effectively any other domestic emergency.

_Restrictions on Export_: Congress, in the Tennessee Valley Authority
Act of 1933, stipulated that no products of the Corporation could
be sold for use outside of the United States, its Territories and
possessions, except to the United States government for the use of its
Army and Navy, or to its allies in case of war.[318]

In a series of enactments, commencing with a joint resolution of May
1934, Congress sought to insulate the United States from the danger
of involvement in foreign wars by embargoing the shipment of arms to
foreign belligerents. The resolution mentioned enabled the President
after consultation with the governments of other American Republics
to proclaim that the prohibition of the sale of arms and munitions
of war in the United States to those countries then engaged in armed
conflict in the Chaco might contribute to the reestablishment of
peace between those countries, after which it would become illegal
to sell such material to the disputants or their agents.[319] On the
same day that he signed the Chaco resolution, President Roosevelt
issued the proclamation contemplated by the Act.[320] In August 1935
the embargo method was imposed uniformly without limitation as to
area. The Neutrality Act of that year provided that if war broke out
between two or more foreign states, the President should proclaim this
fact, and thereafter it would be unlawful to export arms, ammunition
or implements of war from any place in the United States, or its
possessions to the belligerents, or to any neutral area for eventual
trans-shipment to a belligerent country.[321] In addition, the Act
placed a blanket prohibition upon the export or import of arms,
except insofar as authorized under license procured from the National
Munitions Control Board established by the Act.[322] When he had cause
to believe a given ship was about to carry material to a belligerent,
but the evidence was not deemed sufficient to justify forbidding the
departure, the President could require the owner or commander to give
a bond to the United States, with sufficient sureties, that the vessel
would not deliver the men, or the cargo, or any part thereof to a
belligerent.[323]

Congress maintained a vigilant oversight over enforcement of its
neutrality policy. Since the embargo authorized by the 1935 Act could
be applied only on the occurrence of war between, or among, two or
more foreign states, it could not be invoked in the Spanish Civil
War. This situation Congress immediately rectified upon assembling in
January 1937. Public Resolution No. 1, which became law on January 8,
1937, specifically prohibited the export of war material for use of
either of the opposing forces in Spain.[324] Thereafter it amended the
1935 statute, retaining its provisions virtually intact, but directing
it at instances of internecine as well as international war.[325] The
same day that the President signed this law, he issued a proclamation
finding that a state of civil strife unhappily existed in Spain and
prohibited the direct or indirect export of material of war to either
of the opposing armies.[326]

A series of proclamations were issued under this and other contingent
emergency statutes in September 1939.[327] The prohibition on export
of war material was narrowed to a prohibition on the export of such
material until title had unconditionally passed to the foreign
purchaser--the cash and carry system.[328] A number of Presidential
proclamations effected application of the new statute.[329]

Presidential proclamations also reflect the change in emphasis of
statutory prohibitions of the export of war materials. In September
1939, the President issued a clearly neutrality-oriented proclamation
prohibiting enlistment in, or recruitment for, belligerent armed
forces, provisioning of belligerent ships,[330] and subsequent
proclamations of 1940 and 1941 were equally clearly concerned with
preserving adequate domestic stocks of strategic materials.[331]

Upon amendment of the July 1940[332] Act in June 1942, the President
was authorized to prohibit or curtail the exportation of any articles,
technical data, materials, or supplies, except under such rules and
regulations as he might prescribe.[333] Unless the President otherwise
directed, the functions and duties of the President under this section
of the Act were to be performed by the Board of Economic Warfare.[334]
The Export Control Act of 1949 empowered the President to prohibit
or curtail the exportation from the United States, its Territories
and possessions, of any articles, materials, or supplies, including
technical data but excluding agricultural commodities in excess of
domestic requirements.[335] The purpose here was to protect the
United States from the excessive drain of scarce materials.[336] The
Atomic Energy Act also prohibited the export from or import into the
United States or curtail the exportation from the United States, its
Territories and as authorized by the Atomic Energy Commission upon a
determination by the President that the common defense and security
would not be adversely affected thereby.[337]

Obviously embraced within the power to embargo is the power
conditionally to permit exports. Thus, in December 1941 following Pearl
Harbor, Congress permitted the President, whenever he deemed it to be
in the interest of national defense, to authorize the Secretary of War
to sell, transfer title to, exchange, lease, lend, or otherwise dispose
of, to the government of any country whose defense the President deemed
vital to the defense of the United States, any defense article procured
from funds appropriated for the military establishment prior to or
since March 11, 1941.[338]

In formulating an export policy for the period following World War II
era, Congress doubtless has been influenced by the post war inflation.
The Export Control Act of 1949, in granting the President power to
prohibit or curtail the exportation of certain materials, including
technical data,[339] made explicit the Congressional intent to protect
the domestic economy from the excessive drain of scarce materials and
to reduce the inflationary impact of abnormal foreign demand.[340]

_Domestic Conservation_: With a view to stabilizing prices and
encouraging the conservation of deposits of crude oil situated within
the United States Congress in 1935 prohibited the interstate shipment
of contraband oil (i.e., oil produced in excess of state imposed
quotas).[341] Two different provisions of the Second War Powers Act
of 1942 related to conservation of strategic materials. Section 801
empowered the President to direct the Administrator of the Federal
Security Agency to assign the manpower of the Civilian Conservation
Corps to the extent necessary to protect the munitions, aircraft,
and other war industries, municipal water supply, power and other
utilities, and to protect resources subject to the hazards of forest
fires.[342] Section 1201 permitted the Director of the Mint to vary
the metallic composition of five cent pieces to conserve strategic
metals.[343]

_Priorities and Allocation_: In late May 1941, Congress provided
that whenever the President was satisfied that the fulfillment of
requirements for the defense of the United States would result
in a shortage in the supply of any material for defense or for
private account or for export, the President could allocate the
material in whatever manner he deemed necessary or appropriate in
the public interest and to promote the national defense.[344] This
provision was retained in the Second War Powers Act of 1942.[345]
In a joint resolution of March 1947 declaring the need for
maintenance of a technologically advanced and rapidly expandable
domestic rubber-producing industry and for a Congressional study of
the problem, Congress provided that in the interim, pending the
enactment of permanent legislation, the government should continue
allocation, specification, and inventory controls of natural and
synthetic rubber.[346] A year later this power was continued. The
President was authorized to exercise allocation, specification, and
inventory controls of natural rubber and synthetic rubber to insure
the consumption of general-purpose synthetic rubber as a part of the
estimated total annual consumption of natural rubber.[347]

The First Decontrol Act of 1947, providing for the termination of
certain of the provisions of the Second War Powers Act, permitted
the continued exercise of power to allocate materials which were
certified by the Secretaries of State and Commerce as necessary to meet
international commitments.[348] Section 101 of the Defense Production
Act of 1950 empowered the President to allocate materials in such
manner, upon such conditions, and to such extent as he deems necessary
or appropriate to promote the national defense.[349] A related section
provided that no person should accumulate (1) in excess of the
reasonable demands of business, personal, or home consumption, or (2)
for the purpose of resale at prices in excess of prevailing market
prices, materials which had been designated by the President as scarce
materials or materials the supply of which would be threatened by such
accumulation.[350] The Atomic Energy Act of 1946, as amended in 1951,
expands the allocation power to its logical extreme by allocating all
fissionable material to the federal government, making it unlawful for
any person to possess or transfer any fissionable material, except as
authorized by the Atomic Energy Commission.[351]


CONTROL OF PRODUCTIVE FACILITIES

_Priorities_: Particularly in the conversion period preceding
full-scale defense production it is necessary to compel producers
to accord first priority to fulfillment of government contracts.
During such interval prior to all-out defense mobilization, when his
competitors may be satisfying the demands of consumers, the businessman
has ample cause to fear that in giving priority to government orders
disgruntled private customers will be permanently lost to competing
firms. Accordingly, a June 1940 statute provided that, in the
discretion of the President, fulfillment of Army or Navy contracts
was to take priority over all deliveries for private account or for
export.[352] In a year this was amended to extend the President’s power
over priorities to include contracts or orders for the Government of
any country whose defense the President deemed vital to the defense
of the United States and contracts or orders, or subcontracts or
sub-orders, which the President deemed necessary or appropriate to
promote the defense of the United States.[353] In May 1941 the Maritime
Commission was empowered to demand that work on its contracts take
priority over the furnishing of materials or performance of work for
private account or for export.[354] The Second War Powers Act continued
in effect the provision of the June 1940 and May 1941 statutes[355] by
providing that all orders for vessels, equipment, and weapons placed
by the Army and Navy were, in the discretion of the President, to take
priority over all deliveries for private account or for export.

To repair the Spring 1945 flood damages, Congress in June of that
year granted the War Production Board, and every other governmental
agency which had jurisdiction over allocations and priorities relating
to farm machinery and equipment, authorization to take such steps
as might be necessary to provide for the necessary allocations and
priorities to enable farmers in the areas affected by floods in 1944
and 1945 to replace and repair their farm machinery and equipment which
was destroyed or damaged by floods, or windstorms, or fire caused by
lightning, and to continue farming operations.[356]

Again, the Defense Production Act of 1950 gave the President virtually
plenary power to require that defense orders be given priority by
private industry: “The President is hereby authorized ... to require
that performance under contracts or orders (other than contracts of
employment) which he deems necessary or appropriate to promote the
national defense shall take priority over performance under any other
contract or order.”[357] Perhaps not classifiable as examples of an
assertion of governmental priority in the use of productive facilities
are three enactments under which the Federal Government has exercised
the right to withhold issuance of patents and to reserve certain
inventions for its exclusive use whenever the public safety or defense
so require.[358]

_Compulsory Orders_: The establishment of priorities for the
fulfillment of contracts presupposes voluntary fulfillment of
government contracts by private industry. Do the principles of
democratic government preclude conscription of industrial plants,
regardless of the willingness or unwillingness of owners to execute
war contracts? Having conscripted physically eligible young men
under the Selective Training and Service Act of 1940 Congress also
established therein priority for industrial performance on military
orders, and a provision to compel acceptance and priority performance
on defense orders.[359] The President was empowered, through the head
of the War Department or the Navy Department, to place orders with any
individual, firm, association, company, corporation, or organized
manufacturing industry for whatever materials might be required, and
which were of the nature and kind usually produced or at least capable
of being produced by the productive units involved. General Motors
produced automobiles, but they could also produce tanks or trucks as
the Army required. Compliance with all such orders for products or
materials was obligatory and took precedence over all other orders
and contracts previously placed.[360] The use of plant seizure by
the government as the sanction for infraction of the provision has
previously been reviewed in the section on acquisition. In the Second
War Powers Act of 1942 the President was given the plenary power to
require acceptance of and performance under defense contracts or orders
in preference to all other contracts or orders.[361] More recently, the
Defense Production Act of 1950 and the 1953 amendment to it authorize
the President to require acceptance and performance of such contracts
or orders as he deems necessary or appropriate to promote the national
defense.[362]

_Protection of Quality_: Only one example in this category has been
discovered. In 1940 Congress amended an old World War I law, vintage
1918, that provided punishment for the willful injury or destruction
of war materials or war premises used in connection with war
material.[363] Sections 5 and 6 of this Act imposed maximum penalties
of $10,000 fine and ten years imprisonment for willfully injuring or
destroying national defense materials, whatever they might be, premises
or utilities, or willfully making defective defense material or
equipment utilized for the production of defense material. An important
element of the offense was existence of an intent to injure, interfere
with, or obstruct the national defense of the United States.[364] While
laws against sabotage have been enforced vigorously, this 1918 law was
designed to protect the Government against shoddy workmanship and poor
equipment.

_Controlling Labor Relations_: Emergency provisions regulating
labor relations in private enterprise appear to have four different
motivations. First, wide scale control of the relations between
employers and employees may constitute an integral part of a total
program aimed at countering an economic depression. Second, it may be
aimed at preventing unethical practices. Third, the purpose may be
to avoid interruption of vital production. And, fourth, the control
may be designed as a precaution against espionage, sabotage, or other
violation of the national security.

The National Industrial Recovery Act obviously conceived as emergency
legislation which it indubitably was, is the outstanding example of an
endeavor in part through the regulation of employer-employee relations,
to overcome an economic depression.[365] The objective of course was
to increase consumer income and purchasing power, which in turn was
to stimulate production, with related chain effects. Section 7 (a)
required that every code of fair competition established under the
Act guaranteed employees the right to bargain collectively, and to
join or refrain from joining a union. Company unions were outlawed.
Employers were to comply with the maximum hours or labor, minimum rates
of pay, and other conditions of employment, approved or prescribed
by the President. In Section 4 (b) the President was granted the
unprecedented power whenever he found “that destructive wage or price
cutting or other activities contrary to the policy of this title were
being practiced in any trade or industry or any subdivision thereof,”
to license business enterprises in order to make effective a code of
fair competition or an agreement that would carry out the policy of the
Act. Once a finding had been made, and publicly announced, no one could
carry on any business, if in interstate commerce, unless a license had
been obtained. Any order of the President suspending or revoking any
such license was to be final if in accordance with law.

Title II of the Act, pertaining to public works projects, closely
regulated employment practices on projects contracted under the Act:
Convict labor was prohibited; no one, except in an administrative
or executive position could work more than thirty hours a week;
all employees were to be paid just and reasonable wages sufficient
to provide a standard of living in decency and comfort; wherever
possible ex-servicemen with dependents were to be given preference
in employment; and human labor in preference to machinery was to be
used wherever practicable and consistent with sound economy and public
advantage.[366] In June 1934 Congress authorized the establishment
of labor boards to enforce the labor relations provisions of the
N.I.R.A.[367] As is well known these sweeping provisions were later
swept aside in the famed case of _Schechter Poultry Corporation_ v.
_United States_,[368] wherein Mr. Justice Cardozo, speaking for a
unanimous Court, said “this is delegation run rampant.”

Next to be considered are controls designed to forestall interruption
of vital production. Section 8 of the War Labor Disputes Act required
30 days notice of a prospective strike and secret balloting of the
union members concerned.[369] Other sections of the Act authorized
government seizure of struck plants, and made it unlawful to interfere
with government operation of plants.[370] The Labor Management
Relations Act of 1947 set forth procedure whereby the President may
secure injunctions postponing strikes or lockouts which will, if
permitted to occur or to continue, imperil the national health or
safety.[371]

_Controlling Profits_: The campaign of the 1930’s to take the profits
out of war is well known. Correlative to the deeply felt aspiration in
time of peace to end the resort to war as an instrument of policy, is
the popular thesis that war and the profitability of war production
have a causal connection. In time of war, the public, on the other
hand, is receptive to the proposal that command of the services and
lives of mature young human beings warrants conscription of capital at
least to the extent necessary to avoid profiteering, or to the extent
such conscription facilitates the attainment of other worthy defense
goals. In harmony with these beliefs the Vinson-Trammell Act of 1934
authorizing naval construction within the limits of the Washington and
London treaties of 1922 and 1930 instructed the Secretary of the Navy
to make no contract for the construction and/or manufacture of any
complete naval vessel or aircraft, or any portion thereof unless the
contractor agreed to certain conditions: (1) he had to agree to pay
any profit in excess of ten percent of the total contract price to the
United States Treasury (twelve percent was allowed as the profit margin
on aircraft); and (2) he could make no subdivisions of any contract or
subcontract for the same article or articles for the purpose of evading
the provisions of the Act.[372]

In 1938 provisions for close supervision of the leasing of naval
petroleum reserves also were imposed upon the Navy Department,
obviously directed in part at precluding extortionate profit-making
from such leases.[373]

In permitting emergency negotiation of contracts for the acquisition
of construction of war vessels or material with or without competitive
bidding, upon determination that the price was fair and reasonable
the Act of June 28, 1940 to expedite national defense afforded the
Secretaries of War and Treasury authority to modify existing contracts,
including Coast Guard contracts, as the Secretary concerned believed
necessary.[374] Presumably upon a later finding that an agreed price
was not fair and reasonable, profits could be revised downward through
resort to Section 9 permitting contract modification at the discretion
of the Secretary. Again, the Second War Powers Act of 1942, in
permitting the Secretary of the Navy, when authorized by the President,
to negotiate contracts for the acquisition, construction, repair,
or alteration of complete naval vessels or aircraft, or any portion
thereof,[375] stipulated that the cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost system
of contracting should not be used unless considered necessary by the
Secretary of the Navy, in which case the percentage was not to exceed
seven percent.[376] By way of enforcement the government reserved the
right to inspect the plants and audit the books of contractors.[377]

Authority to award contracts without competitive bidding was not
freely granted. A Supplemental Defense Appropriations Act of 1942
required the Secretaries of War and Navy to report to the Congress all
defense contracts in excess of $150,000 and to justify those awarded
without competitive bidding.[378] The Secretaries were authorized and
directed to insert in any contract for an amount in excess of $100,000
a provision for the renegotiation of the contract price.[379] In 1951,
declaring that sound execution of the national defense program requires
the elimination of excessive profits from contracts made with the
United States, and from related subcontracts, in the course of such
program, Congress enacted the Renegotiation Act of 1951 providing for
the renegotiation of defense contracts netting contractors more than a
reasonable profit.[380]


CONTROL OF CREDIT, EXCHANGE, PRICES

_Credit_: The major purpose of the Defense Production Act of 1950 was
to place the national economy on a war production footing with minimal
possible effect upon civilian production and consumption. An effort
was made to expand the total productive facilities of the nation
beyond the levels needed to meet the civilian demand, thus reducing
the need to curtail civilian consumption. To some extent, however, it
was anticipated that normal civilian production and purchases would
have to be curtailed and redirected.[381] In this connection the
Federal Reserve Board by law was empowered to impose consumer credit
controls pursuant to an Executive Order[382] until such time as the
President determined that the exercise of such controls were no longer
necessary. The controls, of course, were to be directed at carrying out
the objectives of the Defense Production Act.[383] In addition, the
President was authorized from time to time to prescribe regulations for
regulating real estate construction credit as he believed necessary
to prevent or reduce excessive fluctuations in such credit. He was
empowered to prescribe maximum loan or credit values, minimum down
payments, trade-in or exchange values, maximum maturities and maximum
amounts of credit.[384] These, of course, were direct controls,
as distinguished from inducements or incentives designed to reduce
civilian demand for materials and productive facilities needed by the
military establishment.

Opposite to the use of credit controls as a means of reducing effective
consumer demand is direct intervention to insure that adequate credit
is available to finance business activities declared by the Government
to be essential to national defense. Conceivably the government could
require that lending institutions, under certain conditions, make such
grants. In lieu thereof it sought to provide incentives to lending
institutions to make loans to defense producers, and avoided compelling
extension of such credit. In fact, credit was made available through
the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, the Smaller War Industries
Administration and most recently the Small Business Administration. As
a _quid pro quo_ the government compels the recipient of such aid to
submit to supervision.[385] Equally effective as loans in financing
needed defense construction or production are advances to contractors.
In providing for the construction of pipe-lines for the transportation
of petroleum products, Congress in 1941 permitted the President to
make such advances as he deemed advisable, through such departments
as he might designate to the contractors.[386] It also authorized the
Secretary of Navy to advance to private salvage companies such funds as
the Secretary thought necessary to provide for the immediate financing
of salvage operations.[387]

_Exchange_: The May 1937 amendment to the Neutrality Act made it
unlawful, when the President had issued a proclamation that a state of
war between two or more states or a state of civil war in a foreign
state existed for any person in the United States to purchase, sell, or
exchange bonds, securities or other obligations of the governments of
any belligerent states or to loan, or to collect contributions.[388]
The First War Powers Act of 1941 echoed this provision, providing
in Title III, Trading with the Enemy, that the President in time of
national emergency declared by him might investigate, regulate, or
prohibit any transactions in foreign exchange, transfers of credit
or payments.[389] The Export Control Act of 1949 permitted the
President to stipulate the rules which should apply to the financing,
transporting, and other servicing of exports.[390]

_Price Control_: In time of war the capitalist economy is transformed
into a closely administered economy regulated in an effort to maximize
war production and minimize dislocation of the civilian economy. To
prevent speculation and dissipation of tax and consumer dollars through
continuous and unchecked price increases, it becomes necessary that
prices be subjected to government control. This was the aim of the
Emergency Price Control Act of 1942. Whenever in the judgment of the
Price Administrator the price or prices of a commodity or commodities
threatened to rise to an extent inconsistent with the purposes of
the Act, the Price Administrator could establish whatever maximum
price or prices he thought equitable and fair. The only guide lines
for “fair and equitable” in establishing a maximum price were the
prices prevailing between October 1 and October 15, 1941.[391] He was
further empowered to recommend stabilization or reduction of rents
in defense-rental areas. Where state or local boards failed to heed
the recommendation the Administrator could by regulation or order
establish maximum rents for such accomodations as in his judgment would
be generally fair and equitable and would effectuate the purposes of
the Act. Rent levels were established on the basis of those prevailing
on April 1, 1941. The Act was amended in October 1942 when Congress
authorized and directed the President on or before November 1, 1942, to
issue a general order stabilizing prices, wages, and salaries affecting
the cost of living. Stabilization was so far as practicable, to be on
the basis of the levels which existed on September 15, 1942.[392] The
President was also given power by regulation to limit or prohibit the
payment of double time except when, because of emergency conditions,
an employee is required to work for seven consecutive days in any
regularly scheduled work week.[393]

In an effort to adapt the price control program to postwar reconversion
and prepare for its eventual termination Congress in July 1946 extended
the life of the Price Control Act of 1942 to June 30, 1947, admonishing
the Office of Price Administration and other agencies to use their
price powers to promote the earliest practicable balance between
production and demand: Congress wanted the control of prices and the
use of subsidy powers to be terminated as rapidly as possible.[394]
The President was directed to recommend to the Congress legislation
needed to establish monetary, fiscal, and other policies adequate to
supplement the control of prices and wages during the balance of the
fiscal year 1947. A Joint Resolution of March 1947 continued the price
control program with regard to sugar until October 31, 1947.[395] Rent
control as well as other war production controls continued in effect by
the Defense Production Act of 1950 which authorized the President to
establish a ceiling or ceilings on the price, rental, commission, rate,
fee, charge or allowance paid or received on the sale or delivery,
or the purchase or receipt, by or to any person, of any material or
service. And the same Act required that the President issue regulations
and orders stabilizing wages, salaries, and other compensation.[396]
Once the Korean War ended, all controls, price, rent and credit were
swept off the statute books.


CONTROL OF COMMON CARRIERS

Congressional enactments under this head generally fall into three
major categories: control of domestic transportation, control of
carriage by American ships, and control of foreign vessels in American
ports. Our interest is confined exclusively to emergency controls
exercisable by the Interstate Commerce Commission and similar federal
regulatory agencies.

_Control of Domestic Common Carriers_: The Emergency Railroad
Transportation Act of 1933 was designed to facilitate rehabilitation of
the depression ridden American railroads. An Act addressed to economic
rather than military emergency, it had nonetheless military overtones.
The maintenance of an efficiently functioning railroad system capable
of meeting potential American defense needs was an objective that could
not be overlooked in the formulation of a successful railroad policy.
The Act set up a Coordinator of Transportation who was to divide the
railroad lines into three groups: eastern, southern, and western.[397]
A number of railroad coordinating committees were created to carry out
the purposes of the Act--i.e., elimination of unnecessary duplication
of services and facilities, control of allowances, etc., and avoidance
of undue impairment of net earnings, and other wastes and preventable
expense, and promotion of financial reorganization.[398] Whenever
unable to carry out these reforms the committees were to recommend
action to the Coordinator who might, at his discretion, issue an order
embodying their recommendations. When the committees failed to act on
matters brought to their attention by the Coordinator he was authorized
and directed to issue and enforce such order, giving appropriate
directions to the carriers and subsidiaries subject to the Interstate
Commerce Act as he found to be consistent with the public interest.[399]

Like the N.I.R.A. the Act contained a provision dealing with labor
relations. The Railroads were prohibited from reducing the number of
their employees below the number as shown by the pay rolls of employees
in service during the month of May, 1933, after deducting the number
who had been removed from the payrolls after the effective date of
the Act by reason of death, normal retirement, or resignation.[400]
A regional committee system was established for the representation
of employees, and provision made for regional boards of adjustment
to settle controversies between carriers and employees. Carriers and
employees were to be equally represented on such boards.[401] The
Railway Labor Act of 1926, as amended in 1934, attempted to establish a
pattern of free union-management negotiation of disputes with ultimate
recourse to a National Mediation Board.[402]

Air transportation received the attention of Congress in a June 1934
statute establishing a commission to make a report to the Congress
recommending an aviation policy.[403] The Commission was to report
its recommendations of a broad policy covering all phases of aviation
and the relation of the United States thereto. Subsequently the Civil
Aeronautics Act of 1938 was enacted, embodying congressional policy
in this field.[404] In 1950 a security provision was added to the
Act, permitting the Secretary of Commerce whenever he determined such
action to be required in the interest of national security to establish
airspace zones in which civilian flights could be restricted or
prohibited.[405]

Another original statute in this field was the Communications Act of
1934, whereunder interstate and foreign commerce in communication by
wire and radio is regulated. Federal controls were aimed at insuring
existence of a rapid, efficient, Nation-wide, and world-wide wire and
radio communication service for the convenience of the public and
for the purpose of national defense.[406] Created thereunder was the
Federal Communications Commission to which elaborate regulatory powers
were granted. During the continuance of a war in which the United
States was engaged, the Act authorized the President to direct that
such communications as in his judgment were deemed to be essential to
the national defense and security should have preference or priority
with any carrier subject to the Act. He could give these directions
at and for such times as he determined and he could modify, change,
suspend or annul them.[407] The President also was authorized to
prevent any obstructions by physical force or intimidations by
threats of physical force of interstate and foreign radio or wire
communications.[408]

The pipe-line construction provision of July 30, 1941 required that
pipe lines constructed with government aid be constructed subject to
whatever terms and conditions the President prescribed as necessary
for national defense purposes.[409] The second War Powers Act of 1942
gave the Interstate Commerce Commission wartime authority with respect
to motor carriers, to be exercised under circumstances and procedure
equivalent to the authority it had with respect to other carriers.
It could issue reasonable directives with respect to equipment,
service and facilities of motor carriers and require the joint use of
equipment, terminals, warehouses, garages, and other facilities. Motor
carriers were to be subject to the same penalties for failure to comply
with action taken by the Commission as any other carriers under its
jurisdiction.[410] In June 1953 Congress continued in effect traffic
priority powers of the I.C.C. which had been granted during the war and
continued by the Emergency Powers Continuation Act.[411]

_Control of Carriage by American Vessels_: The Neutrality Act of 1935
had provided that, following a presidential finding of the existence
of war between two foreign states, it would be unlawful for any
American vessel to carry any arms to any port of the belligerent
or to any neutral port for trans-shipment to, or for the use of,
belligerents.[412] Penalty for violation of this prohibition might
include $10,000 fine, five years imprisonment, and, in addition,
the vessel, her tackle, apparel, furniture, equipment and armaments
would be forfeited to the United States.[413] In addition vessels
were prohibited from carrying war material to belligerent warships
which presumably would effect transfer at sea. If the President or
his delegate had adequate reason to believe a ship about to carry war
material to a belligerent warship, he could prohibit departure; or if
the evidence did not warrant this, the owner or commander could be
required to give a bond to the United States, with sufficient sureties,
in whatever amount the President deemed proper, conditioned so that the
vessel would not deliver the men or the cargo, or any part thereof,
to any warship. Evasion of this prohibition subjected a vessel to the
possibility of being confined to port for the duration of the war.[414]
Application of this Act to Spain was effected by a Joint Resolution of
January 8, 1937.[415]

The prohibition of American carriage of war material to belligerents in
international or civil war was rephrased in the 1937 amendments to the
Act but kept essentially intact. Section 10 of the 1937 Act explicitly
prohibited the arming of American vessels engaged in commerce with
any belligerent state, or any state wherein civil strife exists.[416]
President Roosevelt immediately issued a Proclamation finding the
existence of civil war in Spain, promulgating a list of articles to be
considered material of war, and prohibiting their carriage to Spain by
American vessels.[417]

The Neutrality Act was made more stringent in November 1939. While
it was unlawful to export or transport war materials from the United
States to a belligerent until all right, title, and interest therein
had been transferred to some foreign government,[418] it was unlawful
for American vessels to carry _any_ passengers or _any_ articles or
materials to _any_ belligerent.[419] Furthermore, the President was
empowered to define combat areas, from which American vessels were
by law excluded. The prohibition against arming American merchant
vessels was continued. In August 1940, following the fall of France,
and while the British prepared for a German channel invasion, the
Act was liberalized to permit American vessels in ballast, unarmed
and not under convoy to transport refugee children, under sixteen
years of age, from war zones, or combat areas if the vessel were
proceeding under safe conduct granted by all of the States named in the
proclamations.[420]

In 1953 Congress placed on the statute books a provision suggestive of
the old neutrality acts. Under this law the Secretary of the Treasury,
or anyone designated by the President, could seize and detain any
carrier-vessel, vehicle or aircraft carrying munitions of war from the
United States. The authority to “seize and detain” came into operation
whenever an attempt was made to export, ship or take out of the United
States any munitions of war or other materials in violation of law.
Moreover, the law became operative as long as there was “probable cause
to believe” that prohibited items were being removed from the United
States in violation of the law.[421]

The Merchant Marine Act of 1936 is, of course, another of those
organic statutes designed to promote, rehabilitate, and regulate in
the interest of the trade and of the public, a segment of the American
transportation system. We have already seen that in this Act the
government secured the right in time of war emergency to requisition
American registered vessels. As a condition of the grant of subsidies
toward the construction of vessels in American yards, the Maritime
Commission reserved a power of final approval of the design of such
vessels. This power was of course shared with the Navy Department
which had to approve all defense features in the proposed vessel.[422]
Under the terms of the Act any vessels, the construction of which
was subsidized, were to be so designed as to be readily and quickly
convertible into transport and supply vessels in a time of national
emergency.[423] By permitting it to subsidize operation on approved
routes, Title VI of the Act in effect enabled the Commission to control
also the allocation of American shipping on the various world trade
routes.

In July 1941 the President was given power, during the emergency which
he had declared on May 27 of that year, to authorize the Maritime
Commission to issue warrants entitling vessels to priority over
merchant vessels not holding such warrants, in the use of facilities
for loading, discharging, lighterage or storage of cargoes, the
procurement of fuel, towing, overhauling, drydocking or repair of such
vessels. Vessels holding warrants had priority among themselves in
accordance with the rules of the Maritime Commission.[424] In granting
warrants, the Commission was to make fair and reasonable provision
for priorities. The criteria for helping the Commission determine
priorities were: (1) the importation of substantial quantities of
strategic and critical materials, (2) the transportation of substantial
quantities of materials when such transportation was requested by any
defense agency, and (3) the transportation in the foreign or domestic
commerce of the United States of substantial quantities of materials
deemed by the Commission to be essential to the defense of the United
States.[425]

Certain controls were imposed on the staffing of American vessels. A
statute of December 17, 1941 made it unlawful to employ any person
or to permit any person to serve as radio operator abroad any vessel
(other than a vessel of foreign registry) if the Secretary of the Navy
disapproved the employment for any specified voyage, route, or area of
operation and had notified the master of the vessel of the disapproval
prior to the vessel’s departure.[426] In 1934 a new stipulation
permitted the Commission to suspend the rule requiring radio operators
to have at least six months service before being qualified as a radio
operator. However, suspension of this qualification could not be
retained once the emergency had been terminated.[427]

_Control of Foreign Vessels in American Waters_: The Neutrality Act
of 1935, as amended in May 1937, empowered the President to place
special restrictions on the use of the ports and territorial waters of
the United States. The restrictions which could be imposed involved
limiting access to American ports and territorial waters by the
submarines or merchant vessels of a foreign state. Special restrictions
could be imposed at the President’s discretion once he determined that
such restrictions were needed to protect the commercial interests of
the United States and its citizens, or to promote the security of
the United States. Once limitations on port usage had been imposed,
it became unlawful for any foreign submarine or armed merchant vessel
to enter a port or territorial water of the United States. Only the
President could prescribe the conditions and circumstances which would
justify an exception to the rule.[428]

On October 18, 1939, President Roosevelt issued Proclamation No. 2371
declaring it unlawful for belligerent submarines, whether commercial or
ships of war, to enter the ports or territorial waters of the United
States except when forced into such ports by _force majeure_.[429] The
Panama Canal Zone was exempted from this order. Following enactment
of the November 4, 1939 amendment to the Neutrality Act,[430] a new
proclamation with identical provisions was promulgated in conformity
with the revised law.[431]




CHAPTER VII CONTROL OF COMMUNICATIONS


A contemporary “revisionist” school of historians devoted to a
reappraisal of accepted views of the cause and effect of American
participation in the Second World War, attributes significance to
the charge that the Roosevelt and Truman Administrations selected,
withheld, and released data to historians in a manner calculated to
distort the reasons for American involvement in that war.[432] Similar
charges of selective withholding or release of information, have, of
course, been levied against the Eisenhower Administration.

A daily reading of responsible newspapers quickly discloses abundant
examples of careful selectivity in the release of information by
government officials, can scarcely be denied. Indeed scholars,
journalists, and the American public are becoming increasingly
dependent upon the release of information by the federal government
for their interpretation of recent historical and current events.[433]
Whatever the import of this development, however, it is not within the
scope of this treatise. The present chapter is limited to a survey and
classification of statutory provisions relating to the withholding and
release of information by the government. It is accordingly appropriate
merely to acknowledge the possibility that intensive research
subsequently may disclose to what extent public opinion has been
prejudiced, distorted, or confused by the federal government’s policies
concerning the release of information.


THE RELEASE OF INFORMATION BY THE GOVERNMENT

Statutes concerning the release of information by government agencies
appear to have been drafted with a view to accomplishing the following
purposes: (a) the convenience of other federal agencies; (b) promotion
of program administration or enforcement; (c) to enable public opinion
to influence and restrict administrative action. Legislative provisions
aimed at disseminating information for the convenience of the public
are included with (b) and (c).

_The Convenience of Federal Agencies_: The Tennessee Valley Authority
Act of 1933 contains the only clearcut and noteworthy example of
the convenience type of provision thus far ascertained. Section 19
of that Act affords the Tennessee Valley Corporation access to the
Patent Office as an instrumentality and agency of the United States
Government. The Corporation is authorized to study, ascertain, and
copy all methods, formulate any scientific information necessary to
enable it to employ the most efficient and economical process for the
production of fixed nitrogen.[434]

_Publicity as an Instrument of Program Administration_: As an
instrument of program administration, publicity may be utilized to
influence or coerce conformity with a program of control, or to
facilitate the servicing of agency clientele. The use of publicity
as an integral part of a control program is exemplified by routine
publication of that which is prohibited, as well as by disclosure
designed to exact compliance with government policy by subjecting those
exposed to unfavorable publicity. Section 102 of the Defense Production
Act of 1950, for example, prohibits the accumulation of scarce
materials in excess of personal or business needs or for purposes
of speculation. The President was directed to publish either in the
_Federal Register_ or elsewhere, a list of materials the accumulation
of which would be unlawful.[435] Violators of this section of the
law would presumably suffer from publicity about unlawful hoarding,
if and when their activities became known to the federal government.
More explicit, but indicative of the same intent, was an Act of July
1940 permitting the President to publish a list of persons designated
as collaborators with the Axis powers. Any person so designated
was prohibited from receiving military equipment or munitions for
export.[436] In a proclamation of July 1941, President Roosevelt
authorized compilation and publication in the _Federal Register_ of
“The Proclaimed List of Certain Blocked Nationals” under the Act.[437]

In statutory provisions for registration of categories of persons,
or maintenance of lists of various kinds, it is difficult, if not
impossible, to discern the various purposes to be served by such
requirements. Thus, if the major objective of the Foreign Agents
Registration Act of June 1938 was to secure for the government current
information concerning persons representing foreign governments or
businesses, and to impose a penalty for failure to register as a
foreign agent, certainly a minor purpose was to insure that members of
the public also should have this information available to them. Section
4 of the Act required the Secretary of State to retain in permanent
form all statements filed under the Act, and to make them available
for public examination and inspection at all reasonable hours.[438]
One can hazard a guess as to what extent this publicity provision was
designed to intimidate so-called foreign agents.

For a precise illustration of an attempt to utilize public opinion as
a sanction, we need only look to the Labor-Management Relations Act of
1947, which, in specifying the procedures to be followed in settling
national emergency strikes, obviously contemplated the marshalling of
public opinion, at a strategic point, through publication of the second
report of the President’s board of inquiry, describing the current
position of the parties and the efforts made for settlement.[439] The
report is releasable after expiration of a sixty-day suspension of
the strike, as ordered by a Federal district court on petition of the
Attorney General.[440]

In the Armed Services Procurement Act of 1947, Congress announced its
intention that a fair proportion of the total purchases and contracts
for supplies and services for the government should be placed with
small business concerns, and provided with certain exceptions for
suitable advance publicity to achieve this end.[441]

In setting up the Small Business Administration in July 1953,
Congress directed it to provide technical and managerial aids to
small-business concerns, by advising and counselling on matters in
connection with government procurement and on policies, principles,
and practices of good management. Part of this responsibility would
be met by maintaining a clearing house for information concerning the
managing, financing, and operation of small business enterprises,
by disseminating such information, and by such other activities as
were deemed appropriate.[442] Designed to achieve a similar result is
the provision of the Federal Defense Act of 1950 enumerating among
the functions of the Federal Civil Defense Agency that of publicly
disseminating appropriate civil defense information.[443]

To protect private enterprise the Defense Housing and Community
Facilities and Services Act of 1951 requires that private enterprise
be afforded full opportunity to provide the defense housing needed
wherever possible and that, among other things, the number of permanent
dwelling units needed shall be publicly announced and printed in the
Federal Register.[444] The Domestic Minerals Program Extension Act of
1953 provides that the responsible agencies controlling such strategic
or critical minerals and metals purchase programs publish the amounts
of each of the ores and concentrates purchased at the end of each
calendar quarter under the program.[445]

_Publicity Designed to Enable Public Opinion to Influence and
Restrict Administrative Action_: Characteristic provisions in this
category range from the requirement of publicity prior to taking
action, sometimes with the explicit provision for outside approval or
disapproval of proposed agency action, to the simple publication of
action taken by the agency, and sometimes to an explanation thereof.
The Bank Conservation Act of 1933 stated that before returning to
private management a bank for which he had appointed a “conservator”
(receiver), the Comptroller of the Currency publicize his intentions
and obtain permission of the depositors and stockholders.[446]

A steadily increasing number of statutory provisions require an agency
to report in advance to Congress, the substance of contemplated agency
action, which action cannot be implemented unless approved by the
Congress.[447] One example will suffice as an illustration. The Alien
Registration Act of 1940 entrusted the Attorney General with a limited
power to suspend deportation of certain aliens upon his finding that
such deportation would result in serious economic detriment to a
citizen or legally resident alien who is the spouse, parent, or minor
child of the deportable alien.[448] Whenever deportation is suspended
for more than six months, however, the Attorney General must furnish
Congress the name of the person involved and all of the facts and
pertinent provisions of law in the case. The information sent to the
Congress is printed as a public document. If during the time Congress
is in session the two houses pass a concurrent resolution stating in
substance that the Congress does not favor the suspension of such
deportation, the Attorney General is obligated to deport the alien in
the manner provided by law.[449]

The Reciprocal Tariff Act of 1934 provides that prior to conclusion of
a foreign trade agreement reducing tariffs, reasonable public notice
of the intention to negotiate an agreement should be given in order
that any interested person might have an opportunity to communicate
his views to the President.[450] A similar provision in the Emergency
Price Control Act of 1942 required, so far as practicable, consultation
by the President with members of affected industries prior to
establishment of maximum prices, and publication of such regulations or
orders accompanied by a statement of the considerations involved in the
issuance thereof.[451]

The remaining statutes simply provide for publication of agency
action, although in a context which indicates that publication could
be viewed as a check upon the agency’s discretion. The Coordinator
of Transportation, an office created by the Emergency Railroad
Transportation Act of 1933, was required to make public in such
reasonable manner as he might determine orders which he issued under
the Act.[452] The orders were to become effective not less than twenty
days from the date of publication[453] and in the interim interested
parties might file petitions asking that the order be reviewed and
suspended pending review.[454] The Chairman of the War Production
Board, acting with the Attorney General, was given the power with
regard to the antitrust laws and the Federal Trade Commission Act to
temporarily suspend action against violators. The Attorney General was
required to order published in the _Federal Register_ every instance
of the exercise of this power.[455] The Japanese Evacuation Claims
Act of July 1948 provided that written records of hearings, open to
public inspection, be maintained.[456] In formulating new criteria
for identification of a critical defense housing area Congress,
in the Housing and Rent Act of 1953, required publication in the
_Federal Register_ of notices that before applying the new criteria,
a determination had been made to the effect that a specified area
constituted a critical defense housing area.[457]


SUPPRESSION OF INFORMATION BY GOVERNMENT

Statutory provisions falling within this category may be subdivided
into four groupings: (a) exceptions to statutory reporting requirement;
(b) suspension of the requirement that contracts be let only after
public bidding; (c) suppression of information concerning patent
applications of military significance; (d) maintenance of secrecy
of testimony under certain conditions at the request of the person
testifying.

_Exceptions to Statutory Reporting Requirements_: As chief recipient
of agency reports, Congress very obviously suffers the maximum loss
when it sanctions suppression of reporting requirements in the interest
of national security. Indicative of its sacrifice are provisions in
the Communications Act of 1934 authorizing the Federal Communications
Commission “to withhold publication of records or proceedings
containing secret information effecting the national defense.”[458]
Of like import is the requirement in a statute delegating to the
President power to authorize production, transfer or export of war
material by federal agencies. The Chief Executive had to notify
Congress at least every 90 days regarding war material exports. He
could withhold, however, whatever information disclosure of which
he deemed incompatible with the public interest.[459] In the month
following Pearl Harbor the Secretary of State was authorized during the
existence of a state of war to omit or dispense with reports required
by the Neutrality Act of 1939.[460] In extending the effect of certain
emergency statutes Congress, in the Mutual Security Act of 1951,
permitted the President to submit biannual reports on operations under
the Act. He was privileged to exclude from his report information, the
disclosure of which he deemed incompatible with the security of the
United States.[461]

To prevent information of value to the enemy from being disclosed
in litigation during World War II, Congress provided for staying of
judicial proceedings against the U.S. in time of war on claims for
damages caused by Navy vessels, or for towage or salvage services
to such vessels, when the Secretary of the Navy certified that the
prosecution of such proceedings would endanger the security of naval
operations or interfere therewith.[462] Upon receipt of certification
courts were required to stay all further proceedings in a suit until
six months after the cessation of hostilities or until an approved
earlier date as stated in the certificate. The claimant could petition
the Secretary of the Navy to reconsider the stay, but his petition was
not to contain any recital of the facts or circumstances involved.
Identification of a petitioner’s case was to be solely by reference to
the Secretary’s certificate.[463]

_Suspension of Financial Controls_: In a partially regulated
economy, advertising and competitive bidding on public contracts
benefit producer and taxpayer. These requirements insure relatively
equal access to public contracts by private entrepreneurs, minimize
nepotism or favoritism, and protect the public from extravagance. In
a controlled war economy advertising and public bidding very probably
would frustrate efforts to rationalize the productive facilities
of the nation, and certainly would present the enemy with valuable
intelligence. Indeed, intelligence considerations may lead to provision
for the secret letting of certain contracts, even in time of peace.

The chief of the supply service of the War Department was authorized
in 1936 to purchase materials for the Chemical Warfare Service or
the Signal Corps in whatever manner he deemed most economical.
This authority was delegated to the chief of the supply service in
order to prevent secret military information from being divulged to
the public.[464] A 1939 Act to authorize the procurement, without
advertising, of certain aircraft parts and instruments or aeronautical
accessories, contained a similar provision.[465] If a secret order was
necessary, the Secretary of War, after certification to that effect,
could submit the proposed purchase to three reputable concerns for
their respective bids.[466]

After the fall of France, an act of June 28, 1940 to expedite national
defense authorized the Secretary of the Navy, whenever deemed necessary
by the President during the existing emergency, to negotiate contracts
with or without advertising or competitive bidding upon determination
that the price was fair and reasonable.[467] A few days later a more
general statute gave the President plenary power to authorize the War
Department to purchase urgently needed military hardware during the
great national defense revival of 1940-41, with or without reference
to advertised bids.[468] As long as the President could justify
his actions as necessary “to provide for emergencies affecting the
national security and defense,” (and who, within the Congress or among
the public, had access to the information essential to challenge the
military necessity for given presidential action), he had virtually
a _carte blanche_ authority to write his own ticket. The great
atomic bomb project, involving the ultimate in secrecy, was carried
forward without the Congress being aware that the two billion dollars
subsequently appropriated for the Manhattan Project were being expended
for development of a weapon that might never work.[469]

Title II of the First War Powers Act, enacted shortly after Pearl
Harbor, permitted the President to “authorize any department or
agency of the Government exercising functions in connection with the
prosecution of the war effort, ... to enter into contracts and into
amendments or modifications of contracts ... without regard to the
provisions of law”.[470]

Appropriation measures, as for example the Independent Offices
Appropriation Act of 1948, included funds to be expended for objects
of a confidential nature and required auditing officials to accept the
certificate of the expending agency as to the amount of the expenditure
and that it was deemed inadvisable to specify the nature thereof.[471]
Similarly, the National Military Establishment Appropriation Act of
1950 stipulated that the determination of the propriety of expenditure
of the funds by the Secretaries of the military departments should be
final and conclusive upon the accounting officers of the government.
Payments from this appropriation might in the discretion of the
Secretary, be made on his certificate that the expenditures were
necessary for confidential military purposes.[472] The Central
Intelligence Agency Act of 1949 granted the Central Intelligence Agency
a sweeping exemption “from the provisions of any law which requires
the publication or disclosure of the organization, functions, names,
official titles, salaries, or numbers of personnel employed by it,” and
provided further that “the Director of the Bureau of the Budget shall
make no reports to the Congress in connection with the Agency.”[473]

_Suppression of Information Concerning Inventions of Military
Significance_: Here an abridgment of a private economic right which is
quasi-constitutional in character is justified on grounds of security.
The Government appears to be concerned not so much with gaining access
to inventions as with suppression of the publication, particularly
abroad, of inventions of military value.[474]

A Congressional Act of July 1, 1940 states in part: “Whenever the
publication or disclosure of an invention by the granting of a patent
might, in the opinion of the Commissioner of Patents, be detrimental to
the public safety or defense he may order that the invention be kept
secret and withhold the grant of a patent for such period or periods as
in his opinion the national interest requires.”[475]

Like provisions are contained in the Invention Secrecy Act of 1951.
When the head of a government agency holding a property interest in
an invention deems publication or disclosure by the grant of a patent
detrimental to the national security, the Secretary of Commerce, as
soon as notified, is required to order that the invention be kept
secret and withhold the patent therefore.[476] When the Secretary of
Commerce believes that publication or disclosure of an invention by the
granting of a patent, in which the government does not have a property
interest, might be detrimental to the national security, he must
make the application for patent in which such invention is disclosed
available for inspection to the Atomic Energy Commission, the Secretary
of Defense, and the chief officer of any other department or agency
of the government designated by the President as a defense agency of
the United States. He must also issue a secrecy order at the request
of any of the defense agencies. Moreover, if there is a proper showing
by the head of the department or agency who caused the secrecy order
to be issued that the examination of the application might jeopardize
the national interest, the Secretary of Commerce must maintain the
application in a sealed condition and notify the applicant accordingly.

_Secrecy of Testimony_: Two statutes examined contained provisions
requiring or approving the suppression of information at the request
of persons who had provided it to emergency agencies. In Section 202
thereof the Emergency Price Control Act of 1942 authorized the Price
Administrator to make investigations, subpoena witnesses, and compel
testimony upon the grant of immunity from prosecution. The same Act
also provided that the Administrator should not publish or disclose
any information obtained under the Act that the Administrator deemed
confidential or with reference to which a request for confidential
treatment had been made by the person furnishing such information,
unless he determined that the withholding thereof was contrary to the
interest of the national defense and security.[477] This, of course,
is the reverse of the usual requirement that information be made
public unless contrary to the interest of the national defense and
security. The Export Control Act of 1949 also contained a compulsory
testimony provision, with the requirement that, except as necessary
to the national interest, information given in such testimony be kept
confidential upon request of the witness.[478]


REGULATION OF PROPAGANDA ACTIVITIES

The Foreign Agents Registration Act of 1938, provided for public
disclosure by persons engaging in propaganda activities and other
activities for or on behalf of foreign governments, foreign political
parties, and other foreign principals so that the government and the
public could be informed of the identity of such persons and could
thereby appraise their statements and actions in the light of their
associations and activities.[479] By virtue of a 1942 amendment the
necessity for foreign agents to register with the Attorney General was
waived for agents of allied and friendly nations and thus propaganda
efforts encouraged.[480] These agents could escape the registration
requirement provided they engaged only in activities which were in
furtherance of the policies, public interest, and national defense,
of their own government and the American government, and were not
intended to conflict with any of the domestic or foreign policies of
the United States. However, the agent had to be convinced of the truth
and accuracy of each communication or expression which he made in this
country.

Under the same Act persons required to register as foreign agents
also had to furnish the Library of Congress with two copies of any
political propaganda intended for dissemination to two or more
persons. This material had to be transmitted within forty-eight
hours after dissemination had begun and it had to be accompanied
by a statement, duly signed by or on behalf of the agent, setting
forth full information as to the places, times, and extent of actual
transmittal.[481] In addition, the Act made it unlawful to disseminate
the matter unless the political propaganda was conspicuously marked
at its beginning with, or prefaced or accompanied by, a true and
accurate statement, in the language or languages used in the political
propaganda. The Act further required that the person transmitting
political propaganda be registered under the Act with the Department of
Justice “as an agent of a foreign principal, together with the name and
address of the agent and of each of his foreign principals.”[482]

The Internal Security Act of 1950 applied a similar requirement to
any organization registered as a Communist organization, or ordered
to register by the Subversive Activities Control Board.[483] Such an
organization is guilty of a crime if it transmits through the United
States mails or by any means or instrumentality of interstate or
foreign commerce, any publication which is intended to be, or which
it is reasonably believed will be, circulated or disseminated among
at least two or more persons, unless the container in which the
publication is mailed contains this statement: “Disseminated by ----, a
Communist organization.” Programs sponsored by Communist organizations
on radio or television, in order to comply with the Internal Security
Act, must be preceded by the statement, “the following program is
sponsored by ----, a Communist organization.”


CENSORSHIP AND OTHER RESTRICTIONS

Thus far we have surveyed the discretionary power granted government
agencies, consistently with national defense to withhold information
from the public, the courts or the legislature, and those powers
accorded the executive branch to regulate or conditionally promote
propaganda activities of foreign nations. The following section
pertaining to censorship and other restrictions may be differentiated
from the foregoing as follows. Whereas the first section dealt with
government agencies as custodians of information, here we are concerned
with limitations imposed upon the efforts of individuals and groups to
secure information or to disseminate specified kinds of information
which they may possess.

The relevant statutes are reviewed under three headings. Certain
statutes prohibit the acquisition or attempted acquisition of specified
types of defense data. Others prohibit the dissemination of specified
kinds of information, or the communication of prescribed opinions. A
third group of statutes reflect the disposition of Congress to empower
the government to review and edit personal communications media.

_Illegal Acquisition of Defense Information_: In January 1938 the
President was authorized to define certain vital military and naval
installations or equipment requiring protection against the general
dissemination of information about them. It became unlawful thereafter
to make any photograph, sketch, picture, drawing, map, or graphical
representation of these vital military and naval installations or
equipment without first obtaining the permission of the commanding
officer of the installation concerned. If permission were granted to
anyone seeking information, it was necessary to submit to censorship
whatever information had been obtained.[484]

_Dissemination of Information and Proscribed Opinions_: The same 1938
statute also made it illegal to reproduce, publish, sell, or give
away data without first obtaining official permission.[485] The Alien
Registration Act of 1940 proscribed the advocacy of certain opinions.
It is unlawful for any person, with intent to interfere with, impair,
or influence the loyalty, morale, or discipline of the military or
naval forces of the United States by seeking to advise, counsel, urge,
or in any manner cause insubordination, disloyalty, mutiny, or refusal
of duty by any member of the military or naval forces of the United
States. And it is unlawful for any person to distribute any written
or printed matter which advises, counsels, or urges insubordination,
disloyalty or mutiny.[486] This Act also makes it unlawful to knowingly
or willfully seek the overthrow of any government in the United States
by direct or indirect action. Equally proscribed is any effort which
has as its goal the assassination of any governmental official.[487]
Conspiracy to commit any of the acts enumerated in the statute is also
unlawful.[488]

The Export Control Act of 1949 gave the President power to prohibit
or curtail the export of technical data.[489] Also pertinent is the
stipulation in an August 1953 statute permitting the government to lend
certain vessels to Italy, which prohibited the transmission to Italy of
information, plans, advise, material, documents, blueprints, or other
papers bearing a secret or top secret classification.[490]

In 1951 legislation was enacted prohibiting disclosure of classified
information. It is unlawful knowingly and willingly to communicate,
furnish or transmit to an unauthorized person the following categories
of classified information: (1) codes, cipher or the cryptographic
system of the United States or any foreign government; (2) the
design, construction, use, maintenance, or repair of any device,
apparatus, or appliance used or prepared or planned for use by the
United States or any government for cryptographic or communication
intelligence purposes; (3) the communication intelligence activities
of the United States or any foreign government; or (4) obtained by
the processes of communication intelligence from the communications
of any foreign government knowing the same to have been obtained
by such processes.[491] Violators of this law can be fined up to
$10,000, be imprisoned for ten years, or suffer the imposition of both
penalties.[492]

The Communist Organization Registration Act of July 1954 requires
organizations found by the Subversive Activities Control Board to
be Communist-action or Communist-front organizations to provide the
Attorney General a listing of all printing presses and machines.[493]
The list of different kinds of presses is very extensive.[494]

_Censorship of Communications Media_: The War Powers Act of December
1941 specifically empowered the President to establish censorship of
communications between the United States and foreign countries. During
the existence of the war, the President, at his discretion, established
rules and regulations for the censorship of communications by mail,
cable, radio, or other means of transmission passing between the United
States and any foreign country. The authority to prescribe the rule by
which censorship would be applied, extended to communications carried
by any vessel or other means of transportation touching at any port,
place, or territory of the United States and bound to or from any
foreign country.[495]

A month later the Communications Act of 1934 was amended to enable
the President during time of war or threat of war to regulate or
close any or all facilities or stations for wire communication within
the jurisdiction of the United States.[496] Nearly ten years later
this power was extended to any or all stations or devices capable of
emitting electromagnetic radiations within the jurisdiction of the
United States.[497] The power to close stations for radio communication
within the jurisdiction of the United States included those suitable as
navigational aids beyond five miles of the United States.[498]


ACQUISITION OF INFORMATION BY THE GOVERNMENT

Examined herein are statutes requiring private persons or groups to
report their activities to government agencies, or compelling them to
testify before such agencies; and providing for the conduct or study of
experiments by government agencies, including congressional committees,
for the purpose of obtaining certain information. Other measures
provide for a variety of investigations, inventories, audits, etc., to
be conducted by government agencies and congressional committees, and
intelligence.

_Compulsory Reporting_:[499] Compulsory reporting on an occasional
or periodic basis, it is generally assumed, constitutes an effective
enforcement device. Thus to aid the President in effectively exercising
the powers granted therein, the Bank Conservation Act of 1933[500]
provided that he might require specific, detailed, and confidential
information to be given under oath by any person then engaged in the
banking business. The President could require the production of private
papers, letters, contracts, books of account or other papers in the
custody of the person required to produce them. Not until a very
detailed and thorough examination of the information sought had been
completed, could an accurate report be prepared in compliance with the
Act.[501] The National Industrial Recovery Act permitted the President
to impose such conditions (including requirements for the making of
reports, the keeping of records and the keeping of accounts) for the
protection of consumers, competitors, employees, and others, and in
furtherance of the public interest as he saw fit, as a condition of
approval of codes of fair competition.[502] Another section of the Act
required trade or industrial associations, if they were to receive the
benefit of exemption from antitrust prosecution, to file a statement
with the President in accordance with regulations promulgated by the
Chief Executive.[503] The Securities Exchange Act of 1934 similarly
required periodical reporting[504] as did the 1935 enactment directed
at preventing the interstate shipment of contraband oil.[505]

The first Neutrality Act imposed upon all persons required to register
with the National Munitions Control Board an obligation to maintain
permanent records of all arms, ammunition and implements of war
manufactured for importation and exportation under the rules prescribed
by the Board.[506] The requirement was continued in the 1937 Amendment
which designated the Secretary of State (Chairman of the N.M.C.B.
under the old and the amended Act) as recipient of the information to
be submitted.[507] The Foreign Agents Registration Act of 1938 (as
amended in April 1942) not only required the filing of registration
statements by agents of foreign powers, but compelled each registered
agent to keep and preserve books of account and other records which he
was required to disclose under regulations prescribed by the Attorney
General.[508]

As to procurement statutes, Congress, in connection with a 1934
enactment directed against excessive profit-making or collusive
bidding in connection with naval construction contracts, required
contractors to agree, as a condition of receiving a navy contract, to
submit reports which would show conformance or non-conformance with the
provisions of the Act.[509] The Second War Powers Act of 1942 followed
up the grant of power to exact priorities with a section entitling the
President to obtain a wide variety of information from any persons
holding defense contracts. Contractors were required to keep accurate
records in readiness for whatever accounting the President might
eventually request.[510]

_Authorization for the Conduct or Study of Experiments_: The Tennessee
Valley Authority Act authorized the T.V.A. to establish the physical
plants necessary to undertake experiments for the production of
nitrogen products for military and agricultural uses. Such experiments
were to emphasize both economy and high standards of efficiency.[511]
A 1938 statute authorizing the construction of naval vessels included
provision for the construction of experimental vessels and the
construction of a rigid airship of American design and American
construction.[512] Implementing the latter, appropriations were
authorized for the purpose of rotary-wing and other aircraft research,
development, procurement, experimentation, and operation for service
testing.[513]

The National Science Foundation was established in 1950 as an
independent agency, but within the executive branch of government.[514]
Functions of this Foundation include promotion of basic research and
education in the sciences, initiation and support of basic scientific
research, initiation and support at the request of the Secretary of
Defense of specific scientific research activities in connection with
matters relating to the national defense, evaluation of scientific
research programs undertaken by agencies of the federal government, and
correlation of the Foundation’s work with that of private and public
research groups or individuals.[515] The functions enumerated do not
exhaust the total of those assigned to the above mentioned agency.

In 1952 Congress authorized construction of aeronautical research
facilities by the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics.
These facilities were to be used for the effective prosecution of
aeronautical research. The Committee could expand certain of its
experimental facilities especially since one of the purposes of the
Act was to promote the national defense.[516] A similar kind of
statute enacted in 1953 created an Advisory Committee on Weather
Control. The function of this Committee was to make a complete study
and evaluation of public and private experiments in weather control
for the purpose of determining the extent to which the United States
should experiment with, or engage in, or regulate activities designed
to control weather conditions.[517] It was to correlate and evaluate
the information derived from experimental activity and to cooperate
with the several States in encouraging the intelligent experimentation
and the beneficial development of weather modification and control.
In carrying out these objectives, the Committee was also required to
keep a “weather eye” on seeing to it that harmful and indiscriminate
techniques for weather control were not fostered.[518]


GOVERNMENT INVESTIGATIONS, INVENTORIES, AUDITS

Statutory provisions in this category are classifiable as follows:
investigations, inventories, audits, etc., (a) incidental to program
development or enforcement; (b) precedent to the establishment of
policy in certain fields; (c) designed to aid specified agency
clientele (private groups); (d) accusatory in nature; (e) military
intelligence.

_Investigations Incidental to Program Development or Enforcement_: The
Economy Act passed in the first month of the Roosevelt administration
effected reductions in government pensions and salaries with a view to
reducing the cost of Federal operations. Salary reductions were to vary
with fluctuations in a cost of living index to be ascertained through
investigation by government agencies.[519] The Agricultural Adjustment
Act of 1933, in setting up an emergency program for the rehabilitation
of growers of certain commodities directed the Secretary of Agriculture
to make investigations and such reports to the President concerning
the program as appeared necessary to its execution. In conjunction
with the National Industrial Recovery Act of June 1933 was a 1934
amendment which authorized the President to establish a board or boards
to investigate issues, facts, practices, or activities of employers
or employees in any controversies arising under section 7 (a) of the
statute which were burdening, obstructing, or threatening to burden or
obstruct, the free flow of interstate commerce.[520]

The Second War Powers Act required the Secretary of Commerce, under
Presidential direction, to make such special investigations and reports
of census or statistical matters as might be needed in connection
with conduct of the war. The Act imposed a penalty against anyone who
refused to answer questions, gave false statements or deliberately
neglected to answer questions asked by Departmental subordinates in
the conduct of investigations.[521] It also accorded the government
the right to inspect the plants and audit the books of defense
contractors.[522]

Before presenting to a court a certificate requesting a stay
of judicial proceedings on claims for damages caused by naval
vessels during the War, the Secretary of the Navy had to conduct
an investigation of the case in order to satisfy himself that the
issuance of the certificate was necessary.[523] A principal purpose
of the Employment Act of 1946 was the establishment of an agency
to investigate and report upon the current state of the national
economy.[524] The Housing and Rent Act of 1948 specified that the
Housing Expediter should make surveys from time to time with a view
to decontrolling housing accommodations at the earliest practicable
date.[525] The Federal Civil Defense Administrator is charged by
the statute creating the Federal Civil Defense Administration with
responsibility to prepare national plans and programs, and to request
reports on state plans directed at fulfillment of the objectives of the
Act.[526]

_Policy Development_: A number of statutes contain provisions
designed to satisfy congressional need for information as an aid in
policy-making. A joint resolution of April 1934 directed the Federal
Power Commission to investigate the rates charged by private and
municipal corporations, prepare a compilation of the respective rate
structures and submit the information requested to the Congress as
quickly as possible. In making its compilation, the Commission was
requested to submit any analysis it had made of the difference in rates
charged between the privately owned and publicly owned utilities.[527]
The Commission might require reports and testimony from private power
officials and was given the right to examine and copy any documentary
evidence relative to the sale of electrical energy or its service to
consumers by any corporation engaged in the sale of electricity.[528]
Collecting accurate and comprehensive information regarding the rates
charged for electrical energy and its service to residential, rural,
commercial and industrial consumers throughout the United States[529]
was directed toward satisfying needs of both the agency and the
Congress.

Again in 1934, Congress established a Commission to make an immediate
study and survey of aviation and its relation to the United States
and to report to Congress its recommendations of a broad policy
covering all phases of aviation and its significance to the
United States.[530] The Railroad Retirement Board was directed to
make specific recommendations for such changes in the retirement
system created by the Railroad Retirement Act of 1934 as would
assure the adequacy and permanency of the retirement system on the
basis of its experience and all information and experience then
available. For this purpose the Board was directed from time to
time to make investigations and actuarial studies necessary to
provide the fullest information practicable for the Board’s report
and recommendation.[531] In the third year of World War II a Joint
Committee on Organization of Congress was established. The Joint
Committee was given the responsibility of preparing a full and complete
study of the organization and operation of the Congress together with
recommendations for improvement in its organization and operation.
Congress sought from the study and report the means for strengthening
the Legislative branch of the government by simplifying its operation,
improving relations between the Congress and other branches of
government, and enabling it to better meet its responsibilities under
the Constitution.[532] While some of the more archaic rules under
which the Congress operated, indeed to some extent still does operate,
were long overdue for a complete overhaul, the more immediate stimulus
to action arose from a candid and searching appraisal of Congress’
inability to stem the rising tide of government by the executive. The
demands of emergency government of all kinds even before the Japanese
attack on Pearl Harbor, tended to reduce the role of the Congress to
that of mere ratification of executive action, the latter usually taken
without regard to possible Congressional objections. Reorganization of
the Congress resulting from the Joint Committee study and report was in
response to a growing awareness of the need to improve the functioning
of Congress as an organ for control of a wartime executive.

An important recent statute within this category is the Civil Rights
Act of 1957.[533] This Act created a Commission on Civil Rights,
empowered only to investigate, to study, to appraise and make findings
and recommendations. It was not to be a Commission for the enforcement
of civil rights. Specifically, the Civil Rights Act of 1957 directed
the Commission to:

  “(1) investigate allegations in writing under oath or affirmation
  that certain citizens of the United States are being deprived of
  their right to vote and have that vote counted by reason of their
  color, race, religion, or national origin, which writing, under oath
  or affirmation, shall set forth the facts upon which such belief or
  beliefs are based;

  “(2) study and collect information concerning legal developments
  constituting a denial of equal protection of the laws under the
  Constitution; and

  “(3) appraise the laws and policies of the Federal Government with
  respect to equal protection of the laws under the Constitution.”[534]

The Commission was instructed to submit to the President and
Congress a comprehensive report of its activities, findings, and
recommendations not later than two years from the enactment of the Act.
The Commission’s report was submitted to the Congress on September 9,
1959,[535] just in time to win the Commission a two year lease on life.

Many of the statutes in this category are directed at securing
information on which to base natural resources or scarce materials
policy. In 1947 the President was requested to prepare, through the
appropriate departments of the Government, a comprehensive plan for
the development of the resources of Alaska, and the expansion and
development of the facilities of commerce between the United States and
Alaska and within the Territory. The President was requested to have
the report ready for the consideration of the second session of the
Seventy-fifth Congress thirty-five days after Congress reconvened.[536]

A strategic materials stockpiling statute of 1939 directed the
Secretary of the Interior through the Director of the Bureau of
Mines and the Director of the Geological Survey to make scientific,
technological, and economic investigations concerning the extent
and mode of occurrence, the development, mining, of ores and other
mineral substances found in the United States which were considered
essential to the common defense or the industrial needs of the United
States.[537] Preparatory to enacting definitive post-war legislation
establishing United States policy with regard to the domestic
rubber-producing industry, Congress in 1947 provided for the conduct
of a thorough study of the field.[538] Under the Rubber Producing
Facilities Disposal Act of 1953 the Rubber Producing Facilities
Disposal Commission was created and granted access to all available
information concerning the Government-owned rubber-producing facilities
in the possession of any department, agency, officer, Government
corporation, or instrumentality of the United States concerned with
Government-owned rubber-producing facilities.[539] Included in the
data it was required to furnish the Congress was an inventory report
concerning the Government’s current stocks of synthetic rubber and its
component materials.[540]

Endeavoring to expand production of abaca within the Western
Hemisphere, Congress in 1950 authorized such surveys and research as
were necessary or desirable to obtain the best available land in the
Western Hemisphere for abaca production.[541]

_Information-Gathering For the Aid of Agency Clientele_: In 1938
Congress set up the Mediterranean Fruit Fly Board to conduct a complete
investigation and survey of all losses sustained by growers and farmers
in the State of Florida resulting from the campaign to eradicate the
Mediterranean fruit fly within the State.[542] It carefully stipulated
that the Board’s report did not bind Congress legally or morally to
grant relief to the affected farmers.[543]

Like the farmer, the small businessman receives his full share of
congressional consideration. For the sake of the nation and the small
businessman, the Small Business Concerns Mobilization Act of June
1942 sought to integrate him into the war effort.[544] It created the
Smaller War Plants Corporation and included among its functions that
of making studies with respect to the means by which small business
concerns may be supplied with essential raw materials and receive
fair and reasonable treatment from all Government departments without
interfering with the efficiency of the war-production program.[545]
In liquidating the Reconstruction Finance Corporation in July 1953,
Congress substituted for it the Small Business Administration,
which, among other things, was to obtain information as to methods
and practices which Government prime contractors utilize in letting
subcontracts and to take action to encourage the letting of
subcontracts by prime contractors to small-business concerns.[546] It
was also to make a complete inventory of all productive facilities
of small-business concerns which could be used for war or defense
production, or to arrange for the inventory to be made by any other
governmental agency which has the facilities.[547] Further, it could
obtain from suppliers of materials information pertaining to the method
of filling orders and the bases for allocating their supply, whenever
it appeared that any small business is unable to obtain materials
from its normal sources for war or defense production. And it was
directed to make studies and recommendations to the appropriate federal
agencies to insure a fair and equitable share of materials, supplies,
and equipment to small-business concerns in order to effectuate war or
defense programs.[548] On the other hand, as a condition to securing
loans from the Administration, small business concerns must certify
to it the names of any attorneys, agents, or other persons engaged by
or on behalf of such business enterprise for the purpose of expediting
applications made to the Administration for assistance of any sort, and
the fees paid or to be paid to any such persons.[549]

_Accusatory Action_: The two items of legislation involved here--one
a joint resolution, the other a concurrent resolution--extended the
statute of limitations as it affected “the possible prosecution of
any person or persons, military or civilian, connected with the Pearl
Harbor catastrophe of December 7, 1941”[550] and created a joint
congressional committee to make a full and complete investigation of
the facts relating to the events and circumstances leading up to or
following the attack made by Japanese armed forces upon Pearl Harbor on
December 7, 1941.[551]

_Intelligence_: The obvious example here is the statute setting up the
Central Intelligence Agency in 1947. Its Director was intrusted with
responsibility for protecting intelligence sources and methods from
unauthorized disclosure and for operating an American intelligence
network.[552]


PROTECTING FREEDOM OF COMMUNICATION

It would be distorting the picture not to take into account those
instances in which Congress displayed concern lest the control programs
it enacted would constrict freedom of communication. Thus while the
Price administrator had the power to require licenses of anybody
selling commodities regulated by his office, his power did not extend
to various media of communication. The selling or distributing of
newspapers, periodicals, books or printed or written material, motion
pictures or radio time were exempted from the license requirement.[553]
The Universal Military Training and Service Act of 1951 permits any
member of the Armed Forces to communicate directly or indirectly with
any Member of Congress. The statute expressly forbids any one from
restricting or preventing a serviceman from writing to his Congressman
or Senator. The only limitation placed on such communication is
that the subject matter does not violate the law or the regulations
necessary to the security and safety of the United States.[554]




CHAPTER VIII LEGISLATIVE RESTRAINTS ON THE ADMINISTRATION OF EMERGENCY
POWERS


It is generally conceded that the problem of the responsibility of
administrative officials in a democracy is the very crux of the problem
of the maintenance of the democratic system,[555] and that we must
look chiefly to the Congress for performance of the task of happily
combining administrative responsibility with the administrative
discretion so vital to the maintenance of the democratic government in
time of peace or war. Members and critics of the federal legislature,
particularly since the 77th or first wartime Congress (1941-1942), have
acknowledged and responded to the need to equip it more effectively
to formulate basic policy as well as to scrutinize administrative
execution of the legislative mandate.[556] As appraised by these
critics the problem is one of adequately and accurately informing the
Congress,[557] of concentrating congressional checks upon essentials
rather than trivia,[558] and, in contradiction of those who seek an
unchecked executive discretion in time of emergency, of “including
closer, stronger, steadier cooperation between the President and the
Congress.”[559]

Among recent innovations which may be viewed as the product of this
movement to perfect administrative accountability to Congress are the
requirements of executive reporting to the Legislative Branch and the
“legislative veto.” Whether statutes embodying these devices provide
Congress with a check on the Executive Branch in excess of that deemed
essential, and in effect, accord to the Legislative Branch an actual
participation in the administration of the laws is the major issue to
which this chapter is devoted.


ACCOUNTING TO COMMITTEES

In the course of signing H. R. 6042, a defense appropriations bill,
on July 15, 1955, President Eisenhower rebuked Congress for including
therein Section 638 requiring the Secretary of Defense to secure prior
consent of the House and Senate Appropriations Committees before
separating from his Department functions which he thinks could
better be performed by private industry. The President alleged that
the Congress has no right to confer upon its committees the power to
veto Executive action or to prevent Executive action from becoming
effective. Invoking the constitutional principle of the separation of
powers, he declared his intention to ignore this provision.[560]

While the bill which President Eisenhower reluctantly signed
represented an effort to delegate a share in the executive function
to committees of the Congress, such legislative action is not wholly
without precedent. A survey of legislation in the fields of foreign
affairs and economic or military emergency since 1933 indicates not
infrequent attempts by Congress to secure for its committees some
measure of continuing influence over the exercise of powers delegated
to the executive. This may take the form of requiring periodic or
special reports to policy committees instead of the full houses, it may
take the form of compulsory consultation with committees--and whatever
this entails by way of consequent committee influence on administrative
action, or the committee may be secured a suspensive, enabling, or veto
power over administrative action. It would be rash to construct, on the
basis of our study, a judgment of the potential good or evil attending
the increasing effort of Congress to share the detailed burdens of
administration. The trend, it seems clear, exists, however.

_Reporting to Committees_: The requirement that administrative units
report to superiors, to Congress, or to units of the latter, may be
designed to achieve many purposes. The requirement may be devoid of any
overtone of control--e.g., its aim may be limited solely to providing
of technical information or advice as an aid to policy formulation, or
it may be utilized to promote maximum scrutiny and control of executive
action. For when one must report in detail and frequently on the
discharge of delegated functions, it is necessary either to attempt to
mislead the Congress--a dangerous pastime--or to toe the line and act
as a meticulous surrogate of the legislature, in anticipation of an
imminent accounting with it.

Thus it would be difficult to distinguish the informative and
control purposes of the provision of the Supplemental National
Defense Appropriations Act of 1948 requiring that the Secretary of
Defense report quarterly “to the Committees on Appropriations and
Armed Services of the Congress ... the amounts obligated” for “the
construction of aircraft and equipment.”

The Secretary’s reports were to include a statement of finding by
the President that the contracts let were necessary in the interest
of the national defense and that the contract specifications insured
the maximum utilization of improvements in aircraft and equipment
consistent with the defense needs of the United States.[561] The Mutual
Defense Assistance Act of 1949 permitted the President, upon his own
determination of the need therefore, to transfer funds from one project
to another provided for in the Act. The amounts transferred could not
exceed five percent of the total funds appropriated.[562] Whenever
he made such a determination, however, he was required forthwith to
notify the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate, the Committees
on Armed Services of the Senate and of the House of Representatives,
and the Committee on Foreign Affairs own determination of the need
therefore, to transfer funds from one to report to the Congress
biannually on the administration of the Act.[563] The Mutual Security
Act of 1951 contained a similar provision.[564]

Similar to the above is the 1950 requirement that the Secretary of
the Navy annually file with the Committees on Armed Services in the
Congress information as to the proceeds of all sales of condemned
naval material and the expenses connected with such sales.[565] The
1950 statute permitting the summary suspension of civilian officers
and employees of specified departments and agencies (State, Commerce,
Justice, Defense, Treasury, Atomic Energy Commission, National Security
Resources Board, National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics) gave the
President authority to extend the list of agencies to which the Act
applied. Any additions to the list, however, had to be based upon the
best interests of national security and communicated to the Committees
on the Armed Services of the Congress.[566]

In the Mutual Defense Assistance Act of 1951, which established an
embargo on the shipment of arms, ammunition, and implements of war
to any nation or combination of nations threatening the security of
the United States, Congress gave the Administration the power to
determine what items constituted arms, ammunition, and implements of
war and items should be embargoed.[567] Aid to any nation knowingly
permitting shipment of such materials or equipment to the U.S.S.R. and
its satellites was to be suspended, unless the President found that
unusual circumstances indicated that the cessation of aid would clearly
be detrimental to the security of the United States. Upon making such
a decision, the President was to report his decision and the reasons
for it to the Appropriations and Armed Services Committees of the
Senate and House of Representatives, the Committee on Foreign Relations
of the Senate, and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of
Representatives. Moreover, the President was required to review, at
least once each quarter, all determinations made previously and report
his conclusions to the foregoing committees.[568]

A postwar statute of limited dimensions was enacted in August 1953,
enabling the President to lend to Italy, France, and any friendly
foreign nation in the Far Eastern area, on terms satisfactory to him,
naval vessels of stated categories.[569] This legislation charged the
Secretary of Defense with the duty to keep the respective Committees
on Armed Service of the Senate and the House of Representatives
advised of all transfers or other dispositions of naval vessels.[570]
The Defense Cataloguing and Standardization Act of 1952 established
within the Department of Defense a Defense Supply Management Agency
which was to develop a single catalogue system and related supply
standardization program.[571] The Director of the Agency was required
to transmit to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and
House of Representatives on January 31 and July 31 of each year,
progress reports on the cataloguing and standardization programs.[572]
Similarly, in authorizing the Secretaries of the Army, Navy, and Air
Force to acquire or develop industrial plants as needed for defense
mobilization Congress required the Secretary of Defense to report
semi-annually to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and
of the House of Representatives with respect to those activities
authorized by statute which were not otherwise the subject of reporting
under law.[573]

The foregoing can perhaps best be characterized as legislative
adaptations of Carl J. Friedrich’s so-called “rule of anticipated
reaction.”[574] In context the rule implies that administrative
officers, aware of the imminent necessity of reporting to the
legislature the details of exercise of discretion under delegatory
statutes, will attempt so to pattern their action as to maximize the
likelihood of legislative approval.

_Consultation with Committees_: Legislative restraint is less
obvious--though nonetheless present--in statutes which, instead
of requiring detailed reporting of administrative discharge of
delegated functions, provide for periodic or continuous administrative
consultation with congressional committees. The Economic Co-operation
Act of 1948 created a Joint Committee on Foreign Economic Co-operation,
consisting of ten members from the Foreign Relations and Appropriations
Committees of the Senate, and the Foreign Affairs and Appropriations
Committees of the House. The Economic Cooperation Administrator was
to consult with the committee from time to time as the Committee might
request.[575] In 1950 the Secretary of Defense was empowered after
consultation with the respective Armed Services Committees of the
Congress to provide the facilities necessary or the administration
and training of the Reserve components of the Armed Forces.[576] The
Defense Production Act of 1950 established a Joint Committee of Defense
Production to make a continuous study of the programs authorized by
the Act, and to review the progress achieved in the execution and
administration of such programs. It required all agencies and officials
administering programs authorized by the Act, at the request of the
committee, to consult with the committee, from time to time, with
respect to their activities under this Act.[577] A Joint Committee on
Immigration and Nationality Policy was created to make a continuous
study of the administration of the Immigration and Nationality Act of
1952.[578] The Act instructed the Attorney General and the Secretary
of State to submit to the Committee all regulations, instructions, and
all other information as requested by the Committee relative to the
administration of the Act. The Secretary of State and the Attorney
General were required to consult with the Committee from time to time
with respect to their activities under this Act.[579]

_Committee Participation in Administrative Decision-Making_: The
history of recent use of the “legislative veto” might lead one to
expect that, in those instance in which it seeks to retain a power
of continuous oversight of administration action, Congress would
be prone to locate this function in either or both houses rather
than to delegate it to committees. However, the fiscal 1956 Defense
Appropriations Act, earlier mentioned, is by no means the first
instance in which committees have been assigned the function of
participating in administrative decision-making. In fact, careful
study of the functioning of Congressional Committees might reveal that
compulsory consultation and joint committee-agency decision-making are
more the rule than the exception.[580]

Certainly Congress, in requiring the Atomic Energy Commission to
report to the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy any instances in which
it imparted atomic secrets to other nations, contemplated committee
control of such action. Arrangements with other nations were not to be
consummated until the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy had been fully
informed for a period of thirty days in which the Congress was in
session.[581] If the Committee disapproved the arrangement and found
the Commission unresponsive to its influence, the former would have
time in which to report this fact to Congress.

When it authorized the establishment of a long-range proving ground
for guided missiles in 1949, Congress stipulated that prior to the
acquiring of lands under this law the Secretary of the Air Force had to
come “into agreement with the Armed Services Committees of the Senate
and the House of Representatives with respect to the acquisition of
such lands.”[582] This clearly established a joint committee-agency
decision-making arrangement. A 1951 statute required the Secretaries
of the Army, Air Force, and Navy, and the Federal Civil Defense
Administrator, to come into agreement with the two Armed Services
Committees whenever real estate actions by or for the use of the
military departments or the Federal Civil Defense Administration were
involved.[583] The Emergency Powers Interim Continuation Act of July
1952, continued this provision in force.[584]

In conclusion we mention a device for securing to congressional
committees a form of suspensive power over administrative action. This
is the familiar provision for suspension of deportation orders where
either the Immigration and Naturalization Committee of the House or of
the Senate Committee on Immigration has favorably acted on a bill for
the relief of the alien in question. The Act cited here was restricted
in effect to the Seventy-fifth Congress, and stays of deportation under
it were to be terminated at least by the date of adjournment of the
first regular session of the Seventy-sixth Congress.[585]


ACCOUNTING TO CONGRESS

The preponderance of relevant data collected under this particular head
consists of routine requirements, inserted in delegatory statutes, that
administrators periodically report to the Congress on the discharge
of their functions. It need hardly be stressed that by this method of
acquiring information Congress not only equips itself with data vitally
prerequisite to its exercise of the function of oversight, but that its
demand for such information in itself represents a form of control. The
necessity of periodic reporting interposes an effective psychological
hurdle between the administrator and intentional malfeasance. Certain
reporting provisions clearly reflect a desire to maintain a continuous
check upon the administration; others appear directed more at securing
information and advice as an aid to policy-making.

_Reporting Administrative Activity_: In delegating powers in the areas
of defense, foreign affairs or in time of emergency, Congress is
inclined to insist upon frequent reporting, and to specify carefully
the kind of information and supporting documentation it expects to
receive. It may stipulate, as in the Japanese Evacuation Claims Act
of 1948 and the Mutual Defense Assistance Act of 1949, the subjects
on which it wishes reports, and refrain from imposing an obligation
to report at specified calendar intervals. The Japanese Claims Act
instructed the Attorney General to submit to Congress a full and
complete statement of all adjudications, name and address of each
claimant, the amount of the settlement and a brief synopsis of the
facts of each claim case and the reasons for each adjudication.[586] A
1935 statute required that the Secretary of the Navy report to Congress
at the next regular session thereof all expenditures on ship repairs
in excess of the amounts specified by appropriations legislation.[587]
In April, 1937 the Secretary of Agriculture was granted one million
dollars to “be expended for the control of grasshoppers, Mormon
crickets or cinch bugs,” and required to report to Congress on his
handling of the fund.[588] Similarly, in establishing an emergency fund
for the President in 1940, to enable him to furnish government-owned
facilities to privately owned plants and procure and train civilian
personnel in the production of critical materials, Congress stipulated
that an account be kept of all expenditures made from the fund and
required that a report on the condition of the fund be submitted to the
Congress on or before June 30, 1942.[589]

The Federal Emergency Relief Act of 1933 went so far as to require
the Federal Emergency Relief Administrator to print a report of his
activities and expenditures monthly, and submit them to the President
and the Congress.[590] The foregoing, like the statute of June
1942, mobilizing small business concerns for war production, which
provided for reports to Congress by the Attorney General at least once
every quarter (“not less frequently than once every one hundred and
twenty days”[591]) is somewhat unusual. Standard practice requires
quarterly,[592] biannual,[593] or annual reporting. Annual reporting
may be in terms of a report to be submitted to both houses of Congress
“on the first day of”[594] or “at the beginning of”[595] each regular
session of Congress. However, it more likely will be phrased an “annual
report.”[596]

Congress sometimes requires great specificity in administrative
reporting. Exemplifying such demands are the following statutes. A
1950 statute limited the number of Army officers who might be assigned
to permanent duty in the Department of the Army and the number who
could be assigned to the Army General Staff at any one time. The
Secretary of the Army is required to report quarterly to the Congress
the number of officers and the justification therefor.[597] This is
a simple but extremely precise reporting requirement. The May, 1937
amendment to the Neutrality Act more generally defined and described
the various topics to be covered in the annual report of the National
Munitions Control Board, but stipulated that the report contain a list
of all persons required to register under the provisions of the Act,
and full information concerning the licenses which had been issued
thereunder.[598] A like blend of liberality and rigidity in stipulating
the content of reports was manifested in a 1937 Act designed to
establish a government monopoly of the production of helium gas.[599]
The National Munitions Control Board was to include in its Annual
Report to the Congress full information concerning the export licenses
issued thereunder and whatever additional information and data the
Board considered of value in the determination of questions related to
the exportation of helium gas.[600]

The Secretary of the Navy was directed in 1938 to report annually to
the Congress all agreements entered into for leasing naval petroleum
reserves;[601] and a 1939 statute to facilitate certain construction
work for the Army required the Secretary of War to report annually to
the Congress all contracts entered into under authority of the Act,
including the names of the contractors and copies of the contracts
concerned, together with the amounts involved.[602] The Sixth
Supplemental National Defense Appropriation Act of 1942 established
the duty of the Secretary of War and Secretary of the Navy to submit
a complete list of all contracts awarded in excess of $150,000
together with the names of the contractors, and the subject matter of
each contract. If the contract had been awarded without competitive
bidding, the Secretaries had to supply Congress with a statement of
the principal or controlling reason for selection of the contractors.
Reports had to be submitted within sixty days after the end of the
fiscal year.[603]

In the main the congressional requirement of reporting is cast in
general terms, permitting the administrator considerable discretion
as to content and precise date (if not periodicity) of submission. On
occasion, however, Congress is disposed to insist upon specificity in
exacting reports from agencies, particularly agencies assigned such
tasks as the registering of individuals, licensing, letting contracts,
and the like.

_Informing and Advising the Congress_: A large number of statutes
require reports which appear not so much directed at enforcing
responsibility on the part of executive agencies as eliciting
information and specialized advice for policy-making. In 1934
Congress required the Federal Power Commission to submit a report and
analysis of rate schedules charged by private and municipal utility
companies at the earliest practicable date.[604] The Tennessee Valley
Authority Act[605] contains a reporting requirement commonly found in
legislation pertaining to newly established programs. The President
was directed to recommend to Congress such legislation as he deemed
proper to carry out the general purposes stated in the law.[606] His
recommendations were to be made from time to time as work progressed.
In 1934 Congress authorized the President “to appoint a Commission
composed of five members ... for the purpose of making an immediate
study and survey, and to report to Congress not later than February
1, 1935, its recommendations of a broad policy covering all phases
of aviation and the relation of the United States thereto.”[607] In
setting up the Federal Communications Commission in 1934 Congress
indicated that it expected the Commission’s annual reports to contain
information and advice facilitating further congressional policy-making
in the communications field. The Commission was directed to prepare
an annual report for the Congress which would contain information
and data collected by the Commission considered to be of value in
the determination of questions connected with the Commission’s
regulatory responsibilities involving wire and radio communication
and radio transmission of energy. The Commission was also required
to submit recommendations for additional legislation in the report
if the Commission believed it necessary. And on February 1, 1935 the
Commission was specifically directed to make a special report to the
Congress recommending amendments to the F.C.C. Act.[608]

In the Price Control Act of 1946 Congress indicated its desire that the
control of prices be terminated as rapidly as possible, and directed
the President to recommend to the Congress whatever was judged by him
as needed to supplement the control of prices and wages during the
remainder of 1947.[609] The national emergency provisions of the Labor
Management Relations Act provide that upon exhaustion of the procedures
for deferring and attempting settlement of national emergency strikes
“the President shall submit to the Congress a full and comprehensive
report of the proceedings ... together with such recommendations as he
may see fit to make for consideration and appropriate action.”[610]
A final illustration is drawn from the June, 1951 amendments to the
Universal Military Training and Service Act. This measure established
a National Security Training Commission of five members which, in
addition to generally supervising the training of the National Security
Training Corps, was to submit to the Congress certain legislative
recommendations. These recommendations were to include, but not be
limited to--(a) a broad outline for a program to assure that the
training be of a military nature, (b) measures for the personal safety,
health, welfare and morals of members of the Corps and (c) a code of
conduct.[611]


THE CONCURRENT RESOLUTION

The suggestion has been made that Congress would be better informed
and could exercise a more adequate check upon the administration of
delegated powers “if the major rules and regulations of the agencies
were submitted to Congress under a provisional order system. Under
this system they would become effective after a certain time, unless
negatived by Congress.”[612] This would in effect adapt to American
purposes the provisions of the British Statutory Instrument Act of
1946, requiring that important administrative rules and regulations
issued under delegatory statutes be submitted to the Parliament, where
they would be reviewed by a “Scrutiny Committee” of the Commons.

The resultant veto power might be exercised in a number of ways. A
congressional committee might be given power to scrutinize and report
on such rules and regulations, or delegated a final power to approve
or disapprove. We have earlier noted the extent to which Congress has
equipped committees with a power to review and approve or disapprove
administrative action.

Were Congress to utilize the Joint Resolution as an instrument for
approving or disapproving administrative action, no innovation would
be involved. The Joint Resolution requires presidential signature to
become effective. This legislative instrument traditionally has been
relied upon to clarify congressional intent in delegatory statutes
which it thought had been misinterpreted by administrative agencies
or the courts. However, if in delegating powers to the executive,
Congress conditioned the grant by reserving power to itself by
concurrent resolution or by simple resolution of one house to define
the terms under which the executive was to act and to review, approve
or disapprove such administrative action, a signal departure from
established practice would be recorded. In effect, the Congress would
have retained the power to curb administration through legislative
procedures which do not require Presidential signature to be effective,
and which traditionally do not have the force of law, serving simply
to express the intent of the Congress.[613]

While the Constitution provides that “every order, resolution, or vote
to which the concurrence of the Senate and House of Representatives
may be necessary ... shall be presented to the President ... and
before (they) take effect shall be approved by him,” concurrent
resolutions have not for over a century and a quarter been submitted
for presidential approval.[614] Apparently the earliest use of the
concurrent resolution as a device for enhancing the ability of Congress
to control administrative action is to be found in the Reorganization
Act of 1932, followed by the Reorganization Act of 1939.[615] These
statutes empowered the President to submit reorganization plans
to Congress, the plans to have legal effect unless disapproved by
concurrent resolution adopted within a prescribed period.

Within the past two decades all three instruments--the joint
resolution, the concurrent resolution, and the simple resolution passed
by one house--have been used by Congress in an attempt to retain
influence and control over the administration of emergency programs.
Whether for good or for bad, in statutes delegating emergency authority
the present trend is pointed toward inclusion of congressional power to
review administrative action by concurrent resolution.


DELEGATORY LEGISLATION INCORPORATING POWER TO CHECK BY CONCURRENT
RESOLUTION

Congress appears to have pursued a variety of objectives in
incorporating within delegatory statutes a power to influence or
control administration through concurrent or simple resolution. (a)
In some instances it has reserved power to terminate a statute or
program by concurrent resolution. (b) It has asserted power to enable
or require executive action by concurrent resolution. (c) Finally,
it has made administrative exercise of delegated power subject
to congressional approval or disapproval by concurrent or simple
resolution. The forty odd delegatory statutes noted in the course of
this study, which reserve to Congress the right to influence or limit
administrative action by simple or concurrent resolution, will be
discussed in this order.

_Terminating Programs_: Use of the concurrent resolution for the
express purpose of terminating legislative delegations of power to the
executive branch may take two forms: (a) congressional reservation
of a power to repeal the authorizing statute, or (b) congressional
reservation of the right, by concurrent resolution, to declare an end
to the particular conditions under which the President is empowered to
take action. Exercise of congressional power to repeal by concurrent
resolution generally has been expressed as follows: “The provisions
of this Act, ... shall terminate on June 30, 1943, or upon the date
of a proclamation by the President, or upon the date specified in a
concurrent resolution ...”[616] A similar provision is contained in at
least twenty-three emergency statutes enacted since 1941 and listed
below.[617] The Mutual Defense Assistance Act of 1949 secured to the
Congress a form of item veto through reserving to it the power by
concurrent resolution to terminate assistance to any nation under the
Act.[618]

Instances in which Congress reserves the right by concurrent resolution
to declare terminated the conditions authorizing executive action are
fewer. In a 1941 statute the Secretary of the Navy was authorized to
establish a plant protection force for naval shore establishments and
to maintain and operate this force until June 30, 1943, unless Congress
at an earlier date, by concurrent resolution, declared such force no
longer necessary.[619] A 1942 amendment to the Communications Act of
1934 gave the President certain powers to control wire communication
facilities upon proclamation by the President that a state or threat of
war exists involving the United States. The President’s powers in this
respect were to end not later than six months after the termination of
such state or threat of war and not later than such earlier date as
the Congress by concurrent resolution may designate.[620] In defining
national emergency for purposes of the Federal Civil Defense Act of
1950,[621] Congress stipulated that “the provisions of this title shall
be operative only during the existence of a state of civil defense
emergency.... The existence of such emergency may be proclaimed by the
President or by concurrent resolution of the Congress if the President
in such proclamation, or the Congress in such resolution, finds that an
attack upon the United States has occurred or is anticipated and that
the national safety therefore requires an invocation of the provisions
of this title.” Congress also has reserved the right, although not on
an exclusive basis, to determine by concurrent resolution the “dates of
commencement and termination of an armed conflict.”[622]

_Enabling or Requiring Executive Action_: An example of the use of the
concurrent resolution as an enabling device is the provision of the
Neutrality Act of 1939,[623] which imposed rigorous limitations upon
United States carriage to belligerents “whenever the President, or the
Congress by concurrent resolution, shall find that there exists a state
of war between foreign states.”

_The Legislative Veto_: The Reorganization Acts of 1939, 1945
and 1949[624] are also illustrations of the use of the simple
and concurrent resolution to effect approval or disapproval of
administrative action. All three Acts were designed to foster
reorganization to enable the government to cope with emergency
conditions, and the 1945 Act had the expressed purpose of facilitating
orderly transition from war to peace.[625] The 1939 Act stipulated that
the President’s reorganization plans were to take effect sixty calendar
days after the date on which the plan was transmitted to the Congress,
but only if during the sixty-day period the two Houses of Congress
had not passed a concurrent resolution stating in substance that the
Congress did not favor the reorganization plan. A similar provision was
contained in the 1945 Act, and on July 15, 1946 Congress, by concurrent
resolution, disapproved the President’s Reorganization Plan No. 1.[626]
The 1949 Act provided for a veto of Reorganization Plans by one house.
Under the latter, a reorganization plan becomes operative “upon the
expiration of the first period of sixty calendar days, of continuous
session of the Congress, following the date on which the plan is
transmitted to it; but only if, between the date of transmittal and
the expiration of such sixty-day period there has not been passed by
either of the two Houses, by the affirmative vote of a majority of the
authorized membership of that House, a resolution stating in substance
that the House does not favor the reorganization plan.”[627]

In a class by itself is the Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950, by
the terms of which the concurrent resolution may be employed to veto
interstate civil defense compacts.[628] The consent of the Congress
would be granted to each compact, after the termination of sixty
calendar days of continuous session of the Congress from the time
Congress first received notice of the compact. But Congressional
consent could be denied anytime during the sixty day period if Congress
passed a concurrent resolution stating that it did not approve the
compact.

Remaining for consideration is the utilization of the concurrent
resolution to enable Congress to achieve a more intimate participation
in the administration of selected programs, principally in the field
of immigration and naturalization. In the Alien Registration Act of
1940[629] Congress provided for the deportation of additional classes
of aliens. Aliens of proved good moral character might have deportation
suspended under certain conditions at the discretion of the Attorney
General. However, if deportation were suspended for more than six
months, all of the facts and pertinent provisions of law in the case
must be reported to the Congress within ten days after the beginning
of its next regular session, with the reasons for such suspension.
If during that session the two Houses pass a concurrent resolution
stating in substance that the Congress does not favor the suspension
of such deportation, the Attorney General is required to carry out the
deportation as provided by law. If, however, during that session the
two Houses fail to pass such a resolution, the Attorney General is
required to cancel deportation proceedings at the end of the session.
In subsequent legislation Congress reserved the right by concurrent
resolution to suspend deportation of aliens or to grant permanent
residence,[630] and a considerable proportion of the concurrent
resolutions enacted each year now constitute directives to the Attorney
General in this regard.[631]

The Rubber Producing Facilities Disposal Act of 1953[632] set up a
Rubber Producing Facilities Disposal Commission and authorized it to
enter into contracts for disposal of federally held rubber producing
facilities. The Commission was to report to Congress in considerable
detail on the negotiations and the contents of the contracts. The
report had to be submitted to both Houses of Congress on the same day.
Upon the expiration of sixty days of continuous session of the Congress
following the date upon which the report was submitted to it, the
Commission was free to proceed to carry out the contracts and proposals
as outlined in its report, but only to the extent that such contracts
and proposals had not been disapproved by either House of Congress by
a resolution during the sixty-day period. Congress in recent years
also has asserted the right by concurrent resolution to “declare ...
that the period of active service required of any age group” under the
Universal Military Training and Service Act “should be decreased ... or
... should be eliminated.”[633]


USE OF CONCURRENT RESOLUTION PROVISIONS TO CHECK ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION

A survey of the statute books from 1939 through 1954 reveals few
instances of congressional employment of the device of the concurrent
resolution so thoughtfully included in delegatory statutes. However,
the _Congressional Record_ for the same period bears evidence of
repeated effort on the part of members of the legislature to influence
the administration of delegatory statutes through concurrent or, in
some instances, the simple resolution.

_Terminating Powers:_ Legislative efforts to terminate statutes
by concurrent resolution prove anticlimactic in view of the many
instances in which the power to accomplish this was included in the
delegatory statute. The statute which provoked the most vigorous and
persistent effort at termination by concurrent resolution was that of
January 20, 1942, establishing daylight saving time.[634] From 1943
through 1945 some twenty-four concurrent resolutions were introduced to
terminate the effect of the Daylight Savings Act.[635] None of these
concurrent resolutions survived committee screening.

In 1941 a House concurrent resolution abrogating the authority of the
President to provide aid to Russia under the Lend-Lease Act died in
the Foreign Relations Committee.[636] The appropriate provision of
the Lend-Lease Act provided in general terms for termination of the
lend-lease authority upon adoption of a concurrent resolution by both
Houses.[637] The Act did not provide for suspension by concurrent
resolution of authority to aid specified countries and the resolution
probably sought to exercise a power which Congress had not reserved to
itself in the Act.

Pressure to terminate war controls intensified following the September
2, 1945, signing of the Japanese instrument of surrender. On September
14, House Concurrent Resolution 84 was introduced, “to terminate the
effectiveness of certain provisions of the Second War Power Act, 1942.”
Section 1501 of the Act provided for termination of certain of the
Titles of the Act by concurrent resolution.[638] The resolution did not
emerge from the Judiciary Committee, to which it was referred. Another
unsuccessful effort was made to invoke the concurrent resolution
provisions of the Act two years later.[639] The year following
termination of hostilities saw a short-lived effort to terminate by
concurrent resolution a statute which did not incorporate provision to
this effect.[640]

Some ten additional concurrent resolutions were introduced in the two
years succeeding 1945, the effect of which would have been formal
termination of the state of hostilities to which the lives of various
statutes had been hinged.[641] None of the resolutions emerged from
committee.

_Enabling and Requiring Executive Action:_ Aside from action on
reorganization plans submitted to Congress by the President, the sole
striking instance of successful employment of a concurrent resolution
provision incorporated in a delegatory statute concerned initiation of
a postwar highway construction program, under the Federal-Aid Highway
Act of 1944. The Act, it will be recalled, enabled the Congress by
concurrent resolution to stipulate the date the program was to go into
effect. Senate and House concurrent resolutions were introduced in
the Seventy-ninth Congress in 1945 fixing the first post-war fiscal
year under the Act as the year ending June 30, 1946.[642] The House
resolution passed in that chamber and was agreed to by the Senate.[643]

The Neutrality Act of 1939 is the outstanding, in fact the only, recent
instance of congressional effort to exercise power by concurrent
resolution to require executive action.[644] The Act drastically
curbed American carriage to and trade with belligerents. The President
could proclaim the existence of war between two nations; or, upon
passage of a concurrent resolution finding that war existed between
two countries, the President must issue a proclamation identifying the
belligerents.[645] Thereupon the trade restrictions in the Act become
effective and criminal penalty attaches to their violation.

On the theory that Section 1 (a) “places on this Congress a
responsibility corresponding with that which has been placed on the
President in the matter of finding a condition of war to exist,”[646]
individual members introduced concurrent resolutions declaring the
existence of war between the U.S.S.R. and Finland,[647] Japan and
China,[648] and Germany and the U.S.S.R.[649] These were decently
interred in committee.

_The Legislative Veto:_ Although the first Reorganization Act
containing provision for legislative veto of reorganization plans
was enacted in 1939, concurrent resolutions disapproving such plans
were introduced in vain until 1946. In July of that year both houses
agreed to House Concurrent Resolution 155 disapproving President
Truman’s Reorganization Plan No. 1.[650] The next May a new Congress
disapproved Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1947.[651] The third and
last reorganization plan to be defeated by concurrent resolution was
Plan No. 1, 1948, which incurred congressional disapproved in March
of that year.[652] The Reorganization Act of 1949 permitted veto
of the President’s plans by simple resolution of one house.[653]
President Truman’s efforts to elevate the Federal Security Agency to
departmental status were frustrated by Senate Resolution 147 of 1949,
which was adopted by that body on August 16, 1949.[654] All of the veto
resolutions passed by Congress were favorably reported from committee
to the house of origin.

During the period studied three veto resolutions died in
committee,[655] three (all favorably reported from committee) passed
the House of Representatives only to be rejected by the Senate,[656]
and four were adversely reported from committee and defeated in the
chamber in which they originated.[657] Only one veto resolution was
discharged from committee. It subsequently passed the House but failed
in the Senate.[658]


CONCLUSION

In an era in which governmental controls invade every sphere of human
activity, from economic to cultural and political, administrative
responsibility is essential to the maintenance of the democratic
system. Administration which is responsible is lacking in the elements
of bad faith, arbitrariness, or capriciousness. It constitutes a
reasoned effort, in good faith, to approximate the legislative intent.

Congress is one important source of oversight of administration. Its
effectiveness in performing this role is a function of (a) the adequacy
of its tools, and the skill, conscience, and sustained interest of the
members in wielding them, and (b) the standards it applies in measuring
the adequacy of administrative action.

Experience in this area indicates that Congress is more imaginative in
fashioning tools for checking and influencing the administration of
delegated powers than it is skillful and determined in employing them
to hold administrators to clearly defined standards of performance.

The national legislature has attempted to employ reporting devices and
the concurrent resolution to influence, enable or require executive
action, to terminate or suspend the conditions authorizing it, or
to restrict the application of programs to specified groups. Not
infrequently it has made the exercise of delegated powers contingent
upon prior congressional approval or disapproval.

With the exception of the last category, however, Congress has not
effectively wielded the tool it engineered. The veto resolution has
received ample use because the executive automatically initiates
congressional review when it invokes the delegated power which is
subject to veto. Where Congress must initiate review, the concurrent
resolution provisions tend to lie dormant, or congressional action
tends to be directed at vindicating sectional interests (revocation
of daylight saving time), or direct participation in the framing of
administrative decisions, case by case (deportation suspensions).

Perhaps the moral of the story is that we must free congressmen from
constituency loyalties and subject them to strict party discipline if
we wish to insure that available techniques for the legislative control
of administration are effectively employed to serve an interest which
is broad and public.




CHAPTER IX INTER-AGENCY RELATIONSHIPS


The study of administration proceeds within the framework of a taxonomy
of human relationships, the breadth and content of which remain
fluid. In large measure, when we speak of law we refer to a socially
prescribed and sanctioned taxonomy of human relations. The analysis
offered in this chapter is grounded upon the premise that clarification
and refinement of a taxonomy of administrative relationships
may result from the study of legislative enactments prescribing
relationships between administrative agencies. It also reflects the
supposition that at a time when the behavioral or human-relations
approach to the study of administration is in ascendancy, such a review
may provide an essential foundation for the contrasting of formality
and actuality which is one of the characteristics of behaviorism.

In the following pages we record and classify various kinds of
inter-agency relationship prescribed by statute. We have attempted to
employ the inductive approach, permitting the categories and gradations
of relationship to emerge from the materials. But we are not unaware of
the inevitable intermixture of the _a priori_.

When fashioning economic regulatory legislation, Congress must heed
the complexity of the industrial society to which the controls are to
be applied, and of the bureaucracy through which regulation is to be
accomplished. It will be possible to realize the legislative purpose
only if the active co-operation and help of a wide variety of official
agencies and private groups can be enlisted. And these must include the
groups to be regulated.[659]

Thus it is not surprising to find, upon examining a large number of
emergency regulatory statutes enacted during the last twenty-five
years, that they contain many provisions detailing the relationships
which should prevail between the administering agencies and other
groups, official, semiofficial, or private. Such provisions establish
a variety of rights and obligations. They may have the effect of
enlarging or constricting the discretion of a particular agency to
interpret and pursue legislative policy goals. In the pages which
follow we attempt to sort out and categorize such provisions.

The confusing medley of statutory provisions for kinds and gradations
of inter-agency relationship is perhaps best reduced to order by
invoking the image of three overlapping spheres.

[Illustration:

  permissive or
  mandatory
  solicitation
  or receipt
  or advice of
  a nonbinding
  nature

  mandatory
  performance in
  accordance with
  instruction of
  another agency

  joint pursuit
  of policy goals
  by co-ordinate
  agencies

]

The center sphere, into which and from which the others spill,
represents the kind of inter-agency relationship in which one agency
performs a mandatory, nondiscretionary function at the direction or
“request” of another. Flowing into it, from the left, is the sphere in
which agencies are permitted or compelled to receive advice from, to
consult or confer with others, but are under no obligation to follow
the advice received. The third sphere is that in which two or more
co-ordinate agencies share active responsibility and authority for the
pursuit of a common policy goal.

If the interagency relationships provided for by statute are scaled
according to the binding quality of the advice received by one agency
from another or according to the degree to which two or more agencies
share authority and responsibility for program administration subtle
nuances of interagency relationship are revealed. Advice received may
be purely of an informative and nonbinding nature, or the statute may
be so worded as to indicate that “advice” from one agency to another
amounts virtually to direction. In the sharing of program authority
and responsibility, one agency may perform ministerial functions at
the direction or “request” of another, or, at the opposite extreme,
interagency personnel, judgment, and resources may be fused toward the
accomplishment of a common goal.


COMMUNICATION

Herbert A. Simon’s definition of communication “as any process whereby
decisional premises are transmitted from one member of an organization
to another,”[660] generally describes the kinds of legislative
provisions which will be reviewed in this section, with the exception
that we are here concerned with the transmission of decisional premises
from one agency to another. The transmission may be permissive or
mandatory. The information or advice conveyed may or may not be related
to the framing of a particular decision; it may or may not be binding
upon the recipient agency.


COMMUNICATION UNRELATED TO THE FRAMING OF A PARTICULAR DECISION

_Permissive Consultation_: Provisions for communication are perhaps
seen in their mildest form in the Foreign Agents Registration Act of
1938, which established the right, although clearly not the duty, of
the Secretary of the Treasury and the Postmaster General to accede
to the request of the Librarian of Congress that they provide the
librarian with copies of foreign printed matter excluded from the
United States under congressional statutes.[661]

_Must Receive Advice_: The 1938 Naval Reserve Act created a Naval
Reserve Policy Board, at least half the members of which were to
be naval reserve officers called to Board duty from inactive duty
status, which was to be convened annually for the purpose of advising
the Secretary of the Navy on the formulation of Naval Reserve
Policies.[662] Here a definite obligation to communicate, and a special
agency for communication are established, and the Secretary of the Navy
is by inference required to receive proffered advice, although he is
not obligated to act in conformance with it.

_Must Confer or Consult_: Dictionaries tend to regard the words
“advice” and “consult” as synonyms. And it may be that the Congress
tends to employ these terms interchangeably. Yet it is reasonable
to suppose that the legislature does not regard the transmission of
decisional premises as an invariable one-way process. If this be true,
it is possible although not demonstrable that “advise” as employed in
statutes connotes the offering of counsel or opinion, recommending as
wise or prudent--the communications process flowing in one direction;
and “consult” implies a two-way communication process, “talking over a
situation or a subject with someone to decide points in doubt.”[663]

The Emergency Railroad Transportation Act of 1933 is infused with a
quality of briskness which is absent from the statutes alluded to
above. In this Act Congress created a co-ordinator of transportation
and a number of regional railroad co-ordinating committees. It
stipulated that the co-ordinator must “confer freely with the
committees, and the committees, the carriers, the subsidiaries, and the
Interstate Commerce Commission shall furnish him ... such information
and reports as he may desire.”[664]

The Defense Production Act of 1950 required the President, in
exercising the price and wage stabilization provisions of the Act, “so
far as practicable, (to) advise and consult with, and establish and
utilize the committees of, representatives of persons substantially
affected by regulations or orders issued hereunder.”[665]

_Must Consider_: While not saying that proffered advice must be
accepted, Congress indicated in a 1946 statute that the Civil
Aeronautics Administrator was to hold himself open to influence. In
drawing up his plan for the development of public airports in the
United States, he was required as far as possible to consult and give
consideration to the views and recommendations of the Civil Aeronautics
Board, the States, the Territories, Puerto Rico, and their political
subdivisions.[666] He also had to consult and consider to the extent
feasible the views and recommendations of the Federal Communications
Commission.

The Philippine War Damage Commission was created in 1946 and assigned
the task of making compensation for war damage to private property in
the Philippines. The Commission was required so far as practicable
to give consideration to the recommendations of the Filipino
Rehabilitation Commission created in an earlier act. But, said
Congress, the Commission was not required to await, or be bound by such
recommendations.[667]


COMMUNICATION RELATED TO FRAMING OF A PARTICULAR DECISION

The foregoing advice and consultation provisions fall short of setting
the requirement in a specific action context. They seem to have the
objective of maximizing the likelihood that interested official and
private groups will have the opportunity to influence program content.
At the same time they imply or categorically state that the action
agency need not be guided by such advice. It is not patently clear
in any instance that the administrator must defer action until after
consultation; and, of course, in one instance he is specifically
advised that he is free of such a requirement.

The statutes referred to below clearly link the prescribed advice or
consultation to the taking of specified action by the administrator. In
some instances he must advise with others prior to taking action, but
is not required to follow the advice. In others he is enabled but not
required to act upon receipt of a report or information from another
agency. An occasional statute will require not only consultation,
but the making of specific findings precedent to exercising powers
delegated by Congress. The administrator will sometimes find himself in
a position in which he may take certain action only if it is acceptable
to, or meets the approval of, other groups. And, carrying us to the
end of this progression, we have the statutory requirement that the
administrator act in conformance with advice received.

_Must Seek Advice Prior to Acting_: A June, 1934 amendment to the
Tariff Act of 1930 sought to assist recovery from “the present
emergency in restoring the American standard of living” by authorizing
the President to enter into reciprocal trade agreements for the
relaxation of duties and import restrictions.[668] Prior to concluding
individual agreements, however, the President had to seek information
and advice with respect thereto from the United States Tariff
Commission, the Departments of State, Agriculture, and Commerce and
from such other sources as he deemed appropriate. The advice need not
be followed, but it must be sought precedent to concluding a reciprocal
trade agreement. The 1934 grant of power to the President to prohibit
the sale of arms to participants in the Chaco War made the exercise of
that power contingent upon prior consultation with governments of other
American Republics.[669]

Similarly, in granting the President power, in March, 1941 to authorize
the transfer of American military equipment to the government of any
country whose defense the President considered vital to the defense
of the United States, Congress specified that no defense article not
manufactured for such a foreign power might be disposed of except
after consultation with the Chief of Staff of the Army or the Chief
of Naval Operations of the Navy, or both.[670] The War Risk Insurance
Act of 1950 permitted the Secretary of Commerce “with the approval of
the President, and after such consultation with interested agencies of
the Government as the President may require,” to “provide insurance
and reinsurance against loss or damage” of American merchant vessels
“by war risks.”[671] In 1950 security provisions were added to the
Civil Aeronautics Act of 1938. Among these was an authorization for the
Secretary of Commerce to establish zones or areas in the airspace above
the United States as he found necessary in the interests of national
security. Having established such spaces, he might, “after consultation
with the Department of Defense and the Civil Aeronautics Board ...
prohibit or restrict flights of aircraft” within them.[672]

These statutes simply open up the channels of communication and
insist that they be used prior to the taking of action. They do not
explicitly require the administrator to accept proffered advice, and
whatever effect they have upon his freedom of discretion is subtle and
impalpable.

_May Act on Receipt of Advice or Request_: The 1937 statute extending
the life of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation permitted the
Board of Directors of the Corporation to report to the President that
private credit was sufficiently available from private sources to meet
legitimate demands of any class of eligible borrowers, whereupon the
President might authorize the directors to suspend lending to that
class.[673] Here, in effect, the Board of Directors of the RFC was
given power to report (recommend) and thereby enable presidential
action. The 1947 surplus property act authorized the disposal agency,
upon the request of the Administrator of Civil Aeronautics, the
Secretary of War, or the Secretary of the Navy to omit any of the
terms, or conditions for the transfer of title to such property.[674]
The agency granted a dispensing power which it was enabled to exercise
upon receipt of a request from specified officials.

The first of these two statutes enabled the President to act after
the RFC had made what amounted to a finding. In this, it is similar
to the Nationality Act of 1940, which provided that the President
might, in his discretion, exempt certain aliens in the United States
from the classification of alien enemy, provided the Department of
Justice investigated and established the loyalty of the alien.[675] A
Department of Justice finding of loyalty enables but does not compel
the President to act.

The Secretary of War was granted power in 1941 to remove any officer
from the active list of the Regular Army for such causes and under such
regulations as he might prescribe. He could not exercise this power in
individual cases, however, until the officer had been recommended for
removal by a board of not less than five general officers convened for
this purpose by the Secretary of War.[676]

_Action on Making an Independent Finding_: At least two of the statutes
covered in this survey required the President not only to consult, or
to receive recommendations prior to taking action, but in addition,
to make an explicit finding of fact. The India Emergency Food Aid Act
of 1951 permitted the President, after consultation with appropriate
Government officials and representatives of private shipping, and
after finding and proclaiming that private shipping was not available
on reasonable terms and conditions for transportation of supplies
made available under Act, to provide for carriage in government-owned
ships.[677] Four days after signing the Act, the President proclaimed
that he had consulted with public officials and private shipping
representatives, and had found it necessary to use government
ships.[678] The 1951 amendments to the Universal Military Training and
Service Act authorized the President “upon finding by him that such
action is justified by the strength of the Armed Forces in the light of
international conditions,” and “upon recommendation of the Secretary
of Defense” to decrease or eliminate periods of compulsory military
service.[679]

The remaining statutes, in varying degree, subject administrative
decision-making to external controls.

_Action if Acceptable to Others_: Congress in 1935 imposed, for three
years, limitations upon imports of Philippine yams, twines, cables,
and other fibers. The limitation was subject to continuance for an
additional three years by presidential proclamation, provided such
extension was acceptable to the President of the Commonwealth.[680]
Such an extension was made by a proclamation of January, 1938, in
which the President recited that “the President of the Commonwealth
of the Philippines has indicated to me ... his acceptance of an
extension of the operation of that Act for an additional period
of three years.”[681] Unlike the earlier statutes which require
consultation prior to action, or sometimes permit action only following
recommendation and findings, here the substance of the President’s
action is subject to approval from a source external to the presidency.

_Action Upon Receipt of Prior Approval_: We have already employed, in
another context, the provision of the War Risk Insurance Act of 1950,
which hinged action by the Secretary of Commerce to the prior approval
of the President.[682] The Defense Production Act of 1950 exempted
from anti-trust prosecution business agreements made pursuant to the
request of the President. The President was given a limited authority
to delegate this power to subordinate officials, but only upon the
condition that such officials consult with the Attorney General and
with the Chairman of the Federal Trade Commission not less than ten
days before making any request or finding thereunder. In addition,
the request was to be subject to the prior approval of the Attorney
General.[683] In August, 1950, Congress legislated on the matter of
termination of government employment for security reasons. Persons
whose employment was thus terminated might be employed elsewhere in the
government only if the Civil Service Commission approved a request
coming from the individual or the prospective employing agency.[684]

The Rubber Producing Facilities Disposal Commission was directed to
“consult and advise with the Attorney General” concerning the disposal
of such facilities. The 1953 statute creating the Commission required
that its report to Congress, suggesting an appropriate manner of
disposing of government-owned producing facilities, be submitted first
to the Attorney General who would advise the Commission “whether, in
his opinion, the proposed disposition would violate the anti-trust
laws.” His findings approving the proposed disposals were to be
appended to the report which the Commission made to Congress. Thus,
in effect, the Commission was gently admonished to bring in a report
bearing the Attorney General’s approval.[685]

_Must Act in Conformance With Request_: The next group of statutes
compel the administrator to accept and to act in accordance with
recommendations or requests coming from a source beyond his agency.
The Foreign Agents Registration Act of 1938, as amended in 1942,
permitted certain exemptions from its registration provisions. The
Attorney General might, after notice to the employing government or
the person concerned, and with the approval of the Secretary of State,
terminate in whole or in part an exemption from registration granted
to United States residents who were employees of a foreign government.
When the Secretary of State initiated a request for termination of an
exemption, the Attorney General had to comply with the request.[686]
The Second War Powers Act of 1942 contained a provision for the waiving
of navigation and inspection laws under certain conditions. The head
of each department or agency responsible for the administration of the
navigation and vessel inspection laws was directed to waive compliance
of such laws upon the request of the Secretary of the Navy or the
Secretary of War to the extent believed necessary in the conduct of the
war by the officer making the request.[687]

The discretion of federal jurists has to some extent been subjected
to constriction by the executive. The Secretary of the Navy was given
power, in a July, 1944, statute, to certify to federal courts that
pending suits arising out of damage caused by naval vessels or towage
or salvage services to naval vessels would, if tried, tend to endanger
the security of naval operations. Upon receiving such a certification,
the federal court having jurisdiction in the case was required to stay
further proceedings until six months after the cessation of hostilities
or such earlier date as the Secretary of the Navy might set.[688]

Congress, in February, 1952, took emergency action temporarily
suspending the import duty on lead. The Tariff Commission was to advise
the President at the end of any month in which the average market price
of lead delivered at New York had fallen below eighteen cents per
pound, “and the President shall, by proclamation, not later than twenty
days after he has been so advised by the Tariff Commission, revoke such
suspension of the duties.”[689] In June, 1952, the President issued a
proclamation under this Act, revoking the suspension of the duty.[690]

The converse of these arrangements whereby an administrator is
compelled to take prescribed action upon the request, or upon a finding
of others, is the situation in which he may be barred from taking
contemplated action, in consequence of a request or finding coming from
another agency. Our final illustration falls into this bracket. The
President was permitted by the Export Control Act of 1949 to “prohibit
or curtail the exportation from the United States ... of any articles,
materials, or supplies, including technical data.” But he could not
exercise this power “with respect to any agricultural commodity,
including fats and oils, during any period for which the supply of such
commodity is determined by the Secretary of Agriculture to be in excess
of the requirements of the domestic economy.”[691]


INTEGRATIVE RELATIONSHIPS

The statutory provisions enumerated above have the apparent objective
of facilitating communication between agencies or introducing checks
and balances--contrived frustrations--into the administrative process.
At the least intense end of the scale is permissive interagency
communication; gradually the relating of interagency communication and
agency action intensifies until the point is reached at which an agency
may exercise a delegated power only upon clearance with another agency,
or is compelled to exercise it upon the direction of another. However,
the relationship between agencies is communicative, and they do not by
statute have joint responsibility for decision-making or day-to-day
program development and execution.

The broad group of statutes to which we now turn attempts to distribute
among a number of agencies responsibility and authority for joint
decision-making and action. The resources and judgment of many
agencies may be focused on one program, or a system may be set up for
co-ordinating the activities of many agencies toward the attainment of
broad policy goals. The kind of interagency relationship contemplated
by Congress appears to be more active and positive, more a harnessing
of equals, than those which we have thus far reviewed.[692]

Four principal categories of statutory provisions may be distinguished
under this general head. Some aim at joint decision-making by
two or more agencies. Others enjoin agencies to “co-operate” in
the administration of a given program. A third group establishes
mutual assistance arrangements among agencies. Finally, we have
those statutory provisions which seek co-ordination of interagency
activities.[693]


JOINT DECISION-MAKING

A 1939 stockpiling act required the Secretary of War, the Secretary
of the Navy, and the Secretary of the Interior, to determine whether
certain materials purchased under the Act were strategic and critical.
Once this determination was made, they then were permitted to determine
the quality and quantities of materials to be purchased under the
Act.[694] The Secretary of War and the Secretary of the Navy, when they
considered such action appropriate because the domestic production or
supply of certain materials was insufficient to meet the industrial,
military, and naval needs of the country, were to direct the Secretary
of the Treasury, through the medium of the Procurement Division of
his Department to make purchases in accordance with specifications
prepared by the Procurement Division of the Treasury Department and
approved by the Secretary of War and the Secretary of the Navy. Two
months later Congress authorized the Commodity Credit Corporation to
accept such strategic and critical materials in exchange for such
surplus agricultural commodities; and for the purpose of such exchange
it was left to the three Secretaries to determine which materials are
strategic and critical and the quantity and quality of such materials
needed.[695]

The Central Intelligence Agency Act of 1949 set up procedures for
granting asylum to foreign nationals who have performed valuable
security services for the United States. Whenever the Director of
the CIA, the Attorney General, and the Commissioner of Immigration
determines that the entry of a particular alien for permanent residence
is in the interest of national security or essential to the furtherance
of the national intelligence mission, such alien and his immediate
family shall be given entry into the United States for permanent
residence without regard to their inadmissibility under the immigration
or any other laws and regulations, or to the failure to comply with
such laws and regulations pertaining to admissibility.[696] The
Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 assigns to the Secretary of
State, the Secretary of Commerce, and the Attorney General jointly
the function of determining the annual quota of immigrants for any
quota area.[697] On June 30, 1952, the President issued a proclamation
reciting that the quotas had been determined, and listing them.[698]

The National Security Act of 1947 recited as one of its purposes
the establishment of integrated policies and procedures for the
departments, agencies, and functions of the Government relating to the
national security.[699]


CO-OPERATION

Joint decision-making shades into co-operative relationships which, if
loose and flexible, may be continuing and steady. Such relations may
exist with private as well as official groups.

_Must Co-operate_: The Small Business Concerns Mobilization Act made it
the duty of the Chairman of the War Production Board to co-operate to
the fullest practicable extent with the Director of Civilian Supply and
other appropriate governmental agencies in the issuance of all orders
limiting production by business enterprises with a view to insuring
that small business concerns would not be bypassed in the production of
war materials and goods essential to the civilian population.

In granting the Secretary of the Interior power to construct
demonstration plants for production of synthetic and liquid fuels
from coal oil shale, and agricultural and forestry products, the
Congress specified that “any activities under this Act relating
to the production of liquid fuels from agricultural and forestry
products should be carried out in co-operation with the Department
of Agriculture and subject to the direction of the Secretary of
Agriculture.”[700] A 1945 flood-control act clearly sought to effect
interagency co-operation in facilitating the replacement by farmers of
flood-damaged or -destroyed farm equipment.[701] The War Production
Board, and every other governmental agency which had jurisdiction over
allocations and priorities relating to farm machinery and equipment
were authorized and directed immediately to take whatever steps were
necessary to provide for the necessary allocations and priorities
to enable farmers in the areas affected by floods in 1944 and 1945
to replace and repair their farm machinery and equipment which was
destroyed or damaged by such floods, or windstorms, or fire caused by
lightning, and to continue farm operations.[702]

The Defense Production Act of 1950 provided that whenever the price
and wage stabilization powers contained in the Act were exercised, all
agencies of the Government dealing with price and wage stabilization,
within the limits of their authority and jurisdiction, should
co-operate in carrying out the purposes of the Act.[703]

_May Co-operate_: The Emergency Price Control Act of 1942 was in part
designed “to permit voluntary co-operation between the Government and
producers, processors, and others to accomplish the ... purposes” of
stabilizing prices and preventing speculation.[704] “It shall be the
policy of those departments and agencies of the Government dealing
with wages (including the Department of Labor and its various bureaus,
the War Department, the Navy Department, the War Production Board,
the National Labor Relations Board, the National Mediation Board, the
National War Labor Board, and others heretofore or hereafter created),
within the limits of their authority and jurisdiction, to work toward
a stabilization of prices, fair and equitable wages, and cost of
production.”[705]


MUTUAL ASSISTANCE

Congress will not infrequently require or enable one agency, on an
interim or continuing basis, to come to the assistance of another in
the execution of its program. This may take the form of providing
money, material, facilities, or service to the agency. It is a kind of
mutual assistance program within the executive branch.

The Reconstruction Finance Corporation, for example, was occasionally
treated by Congress as a source of credit to enable agencies to
launch authorized programs immediately after enactment, and thus
avoid the delays which attend appropriation of funds for authorized
programs. The Far Eastern Economic Assistance Act of 1950 authorized
the appropriation to the President of sixty million dollars to enable
the Economic Co-operation Administration to furnish assistance to the
Republic of Korea. As a way of getting the program started at once,
the Reconstruction Finance Corporation was authorized and directed to
make advances not to exceed thirty million dollars in the aggregate,
until the regular appropriation was available.[706] It can readily be
seen that this device might be employed not only to avoid the normal
delays of the appropriations process, but to circumvent or nullify the
obstructive tactics of an unfriendly appropriations subcommittee.

The India Emergency Food Aid Act of 1951 contained a similar provision.
If the President, after consultation with public and private shipping
officials, found that private shipping was not available to carry
American food to India on reasonable terms and conditions, the
Reconstruction Finance Corporation was authorized and directed to
make advances not to exceed in the aggregate twenty million dollars
to the Department of Commerce for activation of vessels for such
transportation.[707]

Other mutual assistance provisions enable or require agencies to
produce or procure goods or services for other agencies under
certain conditions. The Tennessee Valley Authority Act required the
Corporation, upon the requisition of the Secretary of War or the
Secretary of the Navy to manufacture for and sell at cost to the United
States explosives or their nitrogenous content. Upon the requisition
of the Secretary of War the Corporation was to allot and deliver
without charge to the War Department whatever power was necessary in
the judgment of the Department for use in operation of all locks,
lifts, and other facilities in aid of navigation.[708] The Helium Gas
Act of 1937 permitted the Army, Navy, and other government agencies to
requisition helium from the Bureau of Mines, which agency was charged
with responsibility for the production of helium.[709]

The Maritime Commission was assigned responsibility, in July, 1941, for
meeting the shipping needs of defense agencies.[710] The Secretary of
the Air Force was directed to make available to the Civil Air Patrol by
gift or by loan, sale or otherwise, with or without charge, obsolete or
surplus aircraft and aircraft parts to permit utilization of facilities
of the Air Force, and to furnish to Civil Air Patrol the fuel needed to
enable it to complete any specifically assigned mission.[711]


CO-ORDINATION

If co-operation involves working together, co-ordination is the process
whereby things are placed in position relative to each other and to the
system of which they form parts. Administrators may work together, or
co-operate, toward the end of co-ordinating their programs. But joint
decision-making, or co-operative programming are vitally, if subtly,
different from the co-ordination of programs. In the first place,
joint decision-making or co-operation have the purpose of focusing
the judgment and resources of many agencies upon the execution of one
program, whereas co-ordination involves the relating of many similar,
or possibly diverse, programs. Secondly, to indulge a tautology,
joint-decision-making and co-operation (as provided for in the statutes
just reviewed) involve a positive, creative elaboration and execution
of programs, whereas co-ordination consists of minimizing conflict of
purpose among two or more programs.

The Commissioners of the District of Columbia were authorized in
August, 1950, to set up an Office of Civil Defense for the District,
which office would, among other things, plan for integration of the
District’s civil defense effort with that of the federal government and
nearby states, and co-operate with governmental and nongovernmental
agencies and co-ordinate the activities within the district.[712] The
National Science Foundation’s functions include that of correlating
its scientific research programs with those undertaken by individuals
and by public and private research groups.[713] The Immigration and
Nationality Act of 1952 authorized the Commissioner of Immigration and
the administrator of the Bureau of Security and Consular Affairs of
the Department of State to maintain direct and continuous liaison with
the Directors of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Central
Intelligence Agency and with other internal security officers of the
Government for the purpose of obtaining and exchanging information
for use in enforcing the provisions of this Act in the interest of
the internal security of the United States. The Commissioner and the
administrator are to maintain direct and continuous liaison with
each other with a view to a co-ordinated, uniform, and efficient
administration of this law, and all other immigration and nationality
laws.[714]

There were some statutes with regard to which it is difficult, if not
impossible, upon the basis of reading alone, to determine whether
the purpose was to bring the facilities of many agencies to bear
upon the administration of one program, or to enhance the prospect
that the program would be administered in a manner consistent with
the objectives of other related programs. A study of the legislative
history and the administration of these provisions would probably
disclose that the legislative intent was mixed, or that in the process
of administration both objectives were joined.

We might include within this category the Neutrality Act of 1935
which set up the National Munitions Control Board, to be composed of
the Secretaries of State, Treasury, War, and Navy. The Board, acting
largely through the Secretary of State, was the agency for execution of
the neutrality program.[715] The Contract Settlement Act of 1944 set up
an Office of Contract Settlement, headed by a Director, and a Contract
Settlement Advisory Board, with which the Director was required to
advise and consult. The Board was composed of the Director, the
Secretaries of War, Navy, and Treasury, the Chairman of the Maritime
Commission, the Administrator of the Foreign Economic Administration,
the Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Reconstruction Finance
Corporation, the Chairman of the War Production Board, the Chairman
of the Board of Directors of the Smaller War Plants Corporation,
and the Attorney General.[716] Any of these officials might appoint
representatives.

The Atomic Energy Act of 1946 contained provision for a Military
Liaison Committee.[717] The National Advisory Committee for
Aeronautics, created to supervise the scientific study of the
problems of flight, under a 1948 statute, was to be composed of not
more than seventeen members appointed by the President including
two representatives of the Department of the Air Force; two of the
Department of the Navy, from the office in charge of naval aeronautics,
two of the Civil Aeronautics Authority; one of the Smithsonian
Institute; one of the United States Weather Bureau; one of the National
Bureau of Standards; the Chairman of the Research and Development Board
of the National Military Establishment; and others.[718]

Are these representative of congressional efforts to organize
co-operation, or to organize co-ordination? We think the latter,
although it is clear that reasonable men could differ, and a careful
legislative history might prove us wrong.


CONCLUSIONS

Our findings appear to suggest that either Congress has a considerable
feeling for the subtle nuances of administrative interrelationships,
or that it is loose and inconsistent in the language it employs.
The statutory provisions run a gamut, permitting the exchange of
information, providing formally prescribed sources of advice,
compelling agencies to consult, to consult and consider, to consult
prior to taking specific action, hinging action to the receipt of a
prior enabling report or request, requiring prior consultation and
fact finding, requiring clearance or approval from a source external
to the agency, and finally, compelling action in conformance with the
request of another agency. It has harnessed the judgment and resources
of many agencies to the making of particular kinds of decisions,
it has provided for interagency co-operation and assistance in the
accomplishment of policy goals; and it has taken care to assure
co-ordination of related programs.

These are the relationships which Congress has sought to establish
among administrative agencies.




CHAPTER X JUDICIAL REVIEW


Edward S. Corwin has appraised as a misfortune the fact that
“Constitutionalism has worked in this country to impress upon
the discussion of public measures a legalistic--not to say
theological--mold,” and has substituted “for the question of the
beneficial _use_ of the powers of government ... the question of their
existence.”[719]

The United States Supreme Court, rather than the judicial system, is
popularly conceived to have a distinctive role to play in checking
arbitrary government in time of emergency;[720] and it endeavors to
perform that role, albeit none too successfully at times by ruling on
the constitutionality of the government power asserted during such
period of crisis. However, as the chief appellate body in a judicial
system which as a whole “handles a mere trickle of the great issues
arising”[721] during an emergency, the Supreme Court cannot reasonably
be expected to formulate a coherent theory of democratic response to
emergency whereby action designed to meet the exigencies of war can be
harmonized with our constitutional system with only minimum risk to the
preservation thereof.


THE SUPREME COURT’S APPROACH

In its effort to avoid the Scylla of judicial refusal to review the
constitutionality of legislative or executive emergency action, and
the Charybdis of declaring unconstitutional emergency action which
might be vital to national survival,[722]--i.e., in its efforts to
“reconcile the irreconcilables” which Cardozo considered the essence of
the judicial function--the Supreme Court has traveled various routes.
The majority opinions of the Court, or the concurring or dissenting
opinions of individual justices, have at times asserted that (a) the
Constitution is a rigorously confining document to be inflexibly
applied by the Court in measuring governmental action in war and peace;
(b) there exists an emergency power which is above constitutional
limitations; (c) the Constitution is a flexible charter permitting
government action commensurate with need as measured by the Court.

All three of these approaches are characterized by a preoccupation
with the question of the existence of the asserted emergency power.
Under the first, the Court is guided by a narrow interpretation of
the quantum of constitutional emergency power and appears disposed
to appraise the validity of asserted authority independently of any
consideration of the indispensability of the power exercised for
successful resolution of the crisis. Involving covertly virtual
acceptance of the principle, _inter arma selent legis_, the second
is extremely dangerous; for if applied extensively, it would erode
constitutional balance and restraint and perhaps terminate responsible
government in time of peril. Insofar as it chooses to be guided by
the third and purports to sanction only that which it concedes to
be essential for combating an emergency, the Court not only assumes
a task for which it is ill-suited but also frequently shirks its
responsibilities in the performance thereof. Too often when it dares to
condemn as ultra vires action believed unavoidable in the prosecution
of a war, it postpones its invalidation until after hostilities
have terminated. Such post mortem judicial observations afford most
inadequate guides for ascertaining what will be constitutionally
permissible in time of crisis.

Apart from a few brief illustrations of the aforementioned judicial
approaches, we have placed major emphasis upon the Steel Seizure Case
[Youngstown v. Sawyer, 343 U.S. 579 (1952)], for in that decision
are to be found signally important indications of the most effective
contribution which the Federal judiciary hereafter may make in
sustaining responsible government. The need for a more extensive
review of the Supreme Court’s appraisal of emergency power has been
dispelled by Clinton Rossiter’s study of _The Supreme Court and the
Commander-in-Chief_.[723]

_The Constitution as a Rigidly Restrictive Document_: In one of the
extremely rare instances in which a Supreme Court Justice has defied
the Chief Executive engaged in prosecuting a war, Chief Justice Roger
B. Taney in 1861, presiding as Circuit Court Judge at Baltimore,
demanded that the military produce in court one John Merryman, who had
been arrested. When Merryman’s jailers replied to Taney that by virtue
of the President’s proclamation suspending the writ of habeas corpus,
they had been directed not to respond to the writ, the venerable Chief
Justice wrote a stinging opinion informing the President that the
power to suspend the writ belonged to Congress alone and could not be
exercised by the chief executive. Notwithstanding his ruling, Merryman
was not released and the President continued his suspension of the
writ, although Congress did not validate his action until 1863.[724]

Perhaps a better example of Taney’s attitude toward the relaxing of
constitutional restraints in wartime is to be found in an earlier,
unpublished opinion, quoted by Swisher in his biography of the Chief
Justice:

“A civil war or any other war does not enlarge the powers of the
federal government over the states or the people beyond what the
compact has given to it in time of war. A state of war does not
annul the 10th article of the amendments to the Constitution, which
declares that ‘the powers not delegated to the United States by the
Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the states, are reserved to the
states respectively or to the people.’

“Nor does a civil war or any other war absolve the judicial department
from the duty of maintaining with an even and firm hand the rights
and powers of the federal government, and of the states, and of the
citizens, as they are written in the Constitution, which every judge is
sworn to support.”[725]

For the other expressions of this absolutist view, we must look to
opinions handed down in the immediate postwar periods of 1866 and 1946.
_Ex parte Milligan_[726] involved the incarceration of a northerner
suspected of Southern sympathies. Could such an individual be tried,
convicted and sentenced to death by a military tribunal, in an area far
behind the Northern lines, in fact, in a State which had never been
invaded by the Southern armies? Scores of such instances of military
trial and conviction of civilians had occurred in Northern states
untouched by the war.

The majority opinion for the Supreme Court disposing of this issue was
written by Justice Davis and constitutes as rigid a definition of the
limits circumscribing the war powers as could possibly be stated:

“The Constitution of the United States is a law for rulers and
people, equally in war and in peace, and covers with the shield
of its protection all classes of men, at all times, and under all
circumstances. No doctrine, involving more pernicious consequences, was
ever invented by the wit of man than that any of its provisions can
be suspended during any of the great exigencies of government. Such
a doctrine leads directly to anarchy or despotism; but the theory of
necessity on which it is based is false; for the government, within the
constitution, has all the powers granted to it, which are necessary to
preserve its existence....

“... It could well be said that a country, preserved at the sacrifice
of all the cardinal principles of liberty, is not worth the cost of
preservation.”[727]

This opinion by a Lincoln appointee to the Court was offset in part by
the concurring opinion of Lincoln’s former Secretary of the Treasury.
Chief Justice Chase could conceive of a situation in which Congress
might find such measures “essential to the prosecution of the war
with vigor and success,” and would therefore be entitled under the
Constitution to resort to them. Independent of statutory authorization
the President, however, could not employ such power. He was limited to
executing the measures adopted by Congress.[728]

Some eighty years later, in 1941, martial law was declared in Hawaii.
From that time through the Fall of 1945, the Islands were ruled by
the military. After bitter and protracted litigation, in which the
federal courts in Honolulu were particularly outspoken against the type
of military rule practiced in the Islands, the cases of _Duncan_ v.
_Kahanamoku_ and _White_ v. _Steer_ managed to surmount the obstacle
course to the Supreme Court.[729] Duncan and White were civilians who
had been apprehended during the war and tried and convicted by the
military, the former for assault against a Marine sentry, and the
latter for embezzlement. Both were crimes under the Hawaiian civil
code. Challenging the jurisdiction of the military to try these men,
a lower federal court ordered their release upon petition for habeas
corpus; and on appeal the validity of the District Court order was
sustained by the Supreme Court in an opinion written by Justice Black.
The case turned upon a narrow interpretation of the meaning of “martial
law.” The term did not, Black said, embrace trial of civilians by
military courts. He did leave the door ajar, however, implying that it
is not inconceivable in a situation of dire necessity, that such trial
of civilians by the military might be upheld.

In a concurring opinion, however, Justice Murphy restated the principle
expressed in the _Milligan_ case. Exalting civilian supremacy over the
military, he reiterated the _Milligan_ rule that civilians may not be
tried by the military when the courts are open and functioning. Not
only did he agree with Justice Black that the acts of the military
contravened statutory law, but he also was of the belief they were
proscribed by the due process clause and therefore manifestly
unconstitutional. Unlike the Civil War Justices, however, he suggested
that until the courts were able to resume their functions the military
might retain custody of its prisoners.[730]

_Extra-Constitutional Sources of Emergency Power:_ Perhaps the most
expansive argument for a constitutionally sanctioned, unqualified
emergency power is that developed and expressed by Justice George
Sutherland in a work published in 1919,[731] before his accession
to the bench, and restated in his opinion for the Court in _United
States_ v. _Curtiss-Wright Export Corporation_.[732] In _Constitutional
Power and World Affairs_, he asserted:

“As the highest duty of the nation is self-preservation, the rights
of peace must then be held in subjection to the necessities of war.
This does not result in a suspension of the Constitution, as some
have petulantly suggested, but it may result in a suspension of
constitutional rights of the individual because they conflict with the
paramount powers of war....

“This power is tremendous; it is strictly constitutional; but it breaks
down every barrier so anxiously erected for the protection of liberty,
of property and of life.”[733]

The later Supreme Court opinion only removes the inconsistencies from
these passages, and recognizes the war powers as extra-constitutional
in nature:

“It results that the investment of the federal government with the
powers of external sovereignty did not depend upon the affirmative
grants of the Constitution. The powers to declare and wage war, to
conclude peace, to make treaties, to maintain diplomatic relations
with other sovereignties, if they had never been mentioned in the
Constitution, would have been vested in the federal government as
necessary concomitants of nationality.”[734]

Justice Jackson, dissenting in the Japanese relocation case,
_Korematsu_ v. _United States_,[735] advocated complete judicial
abnegation of any pretended power to review the necessity for emergency
action. Favoring, however, a reversal of the judgment and a “discharge
of the prisoner,” Jackson added that he couldn’t subscribe to the
view that the existence of “reasonable military grounds” for such a
wartime program made it constitutionally valid and subject to judicial
enforcement.[736] The Court cannot

“... require such a commander in such circumstances to act as a
reasonable man; he may be unreasonably cautious and exacting. Perhaps
he should be....

“But if we cannot confine military expedients by the Constitution,
neither would I distort the Constitution to approve all that the
military may deem expedient....

“A military commander may overstep the bounds of constitutionality,
and it is an incident. But if we review and approve, that passing
incident becomes a doctrine of the Constitution ... a judicial
opinion rationalizes such an order to show that it conforms to the
Constitution, or rather rationalizes the Constitution to show that the
Constitution sanctions such an order....”[737]

It is true that the existence of this power in the government in
wartime, and the admitted inability of the Court to restrict it, is “an
inherent threat to liberty.”

“But I would not lead people to rely on this Court for a review that
seems to me wholly delusive. The military reasonableness of these
orders can only be determined by the military superiors. If the people
ever let command of the war power fall into irresponsible hands, the
courts wield no power equal to its restraint. The chief restraint upon
those who command the physical forces of the country, in the future as
in the past, must be their responsibilities to the political judgments
of their contemporaries and to the moral judgments of history.”[738]

Like Machiavelli, Jackson conducts an analysis in simple power terms.
But while Machiavelli suggested it was possible to devise ways to
circumscribe and check the exercise of emergency power by leaders in
a republic, the modern liberal, true to the tradition of Locke, can
conceive of no limits upon the actions of a war government but the
force of public opinion.

_The Constitution as a Flexible Charter_: Although as recently as World
War II all three strains of thought regarding emergency powers of the
Chief Executive during wartime found effective expression in opinions
of individual justices on the Court, the most persistent has been the
attempt to compromise the range of views by positing a Constitution
broad and flexible enough to encompass emergency action responsive to
existing need, as measured by the Court. This has been described by
Professor Corwin as “constitutional relativity.”[739]

The “clear and present danger” doctrine, first enunciated by Justice
Holmes in the _Schenck_ case[740] is an example of constitutional
relativity. Its recent application illustrates what is to be expected
when the Court, having accepted the obligation to determine the
necessity for emergency action, subsequently is led by doubts as to the
adequacy of its tools for measurement to redefine the conditions of
an emergency in such a manner as virtually to evade the problem.[741]
It also points up some of the difficulties in consistently applying
whatever criteria for measurement are developed by the Court.

Schenck had been convicted under the Espionage Act of 1917 for
seeking to obstruct the draft. He had circularized a mailing list
with literature opposing the World War I draft law. Included on the
list were a number of persons in the military service at the time of
receipt of the material. Holmes’ reasoned as follows:

“The question in every case is whether the words used are used in such
circumstances and are of such a nature as to create a clear and present
danger that they will bring about the substantive evils that Congress
has a right to prevent. It is a question of proximity and degree....

“It seems to be admitted that if an actual obstruction of the
recruiting service were proved, liability for words that produced that
effect might be enforced.... If the act, ... its tendency and the
intent with which it is done are the same, we perceive no ground for
saying that success alone warrants making the act a crime.”[742]

Schenck remained in jail.

In a subsequent case under the same Act, involving a group of
“radicals” who had disseminated a pamphlet condemning United States
intervention in Russia and threatening to thwart that intervention
by causing trouble on the home front, calling upon munitions workers
to quit their jobs, and advocating revolution, Holmes dissented from
a decision upholding their conviction.[743] Rejecting as fallacious
the conclusion of his colleagues that the surreptitious publishing of
a “silly leaflet by an unknown man, without more, would present any
immediate danger that its opinions would hinder the success of the
government arms or have any appreciable tendency to do so,” Holmes
maintained:

“An intent to prevent interference with the revolution in Russia might
have been satisfied without any hindrance to carrying on the war in
which we were engaged....

“Even if I am technically wrong and enough can be squeezed from these
poor and puny anonymities to turn the color of legal litmus paper;
I will add, even if what I think the necessary intent were shown;
the most nominal punishment seems to me all that possibly could be
inflicted, unless the defendants are to be made to suffer not for what
the indictment alleges but for the creed that they avow....”[744]

The significance of this latter opinion would appear to derive from the
fact that by employing the descriptive adjectives “silly” and “puny”
Holmes transformed his clear and present danger doctrine into a vehicle
for opposing conviction of persons for what would seem, on the face of
the record, possibly a more aggravated offense than Schenck’s. Thus the
“clear and present danger” test in application may become entangled
with the sentiment of the person applying it. Secondly, it is important
to note the appraisal which Holmes made as to the military significance
of American intervention in Russia. In his estimation, had it been
thwarted our war effort would not have been effected. As a dissenter
Holmes, with the support of Brandeis, persisted in applying the “clear
and present danger” test in a number of later decisions, notably the
_Gitlow_ case and the _Whitney_ case.[745]

In the post-World War II era, however, this test definitely appears
to have been radically altered, if not conclusively rejected. Thus in
_Dennis_ v. _United States_, sustaining the conviction under the Smith
Act[746] of eleven top Communist Party leaders, Judge Learned Hand,
presiding over the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, stated:

“The phrase, ‘clear and present danger,’ has come to be used as a
shorthand statement of those among such mixed or compounded utterances
which the Amendment does not protect.... It is a way to describe a
penumbra of occasions, even the outskirts of which are indefinable,
but within which, as is so often the case, the courts must find their
way as they can. In each case they must ask whether the gravity of the
‘evil,’ discounted by its improbability, justified such invasion of
free speech as is necessary to avoid the danger....

“... When does the conspiracy become a ‘present danger’? The jury
has found that the conspirators will strike as soon as success seems
possible, and obviously, no one in his senses would strike sooner.
[Meanwhile, the Communist leaders claim the right to continue their
activities.] That position presupposes that the Amendment assures
them freedom for all preparatory steps and in the end, the choice of
initiative, dependent upon the moment when they believe us, who must
wait the blow, to be the worst prepared to receive it.”[747]

By substituting “probability” for “imminence” in time, Hand
substantially changed the clear and present danger doctrine. On appeal
the Supreme Court, with certain modifications, in effect affirmed
Hand’s redefinition.[748]

In connection with these examples of judicial application of the
“clear and present danger” doctrine it is equally pertinent to set
forth Chief Justice Hughes’ famous dictum that “the war power of the
Federal Government ... is a power to wage war successfully,”[749] and
to refer to the decisions arising out of World War II Japanese curfew
and relocation[750] and rent control.[751] The Court’s approach is
epitomized by Black’s reasoning in his majority opinion in _Korematsu_
v. _United States_:

“But when under conditions of modern warfare our shores are threatened
by hostile forces, the power to protect must be commensurate with the
threatened danger....

“... hardships are a part of war, and war is an aggregation of
hardships. All citizens alike, both in and out of uniform, feel the
impact of war in greater or lesser measure.”[752]

Whether the Court is competent to fulfill the role of protector of the
Constitution in wartime is highly debatable. Is the Court capable of
performing the task, even if time were available? Obviously not. It
does not have the information requisite for determination of current
needs and the adequacy and appropriateness of government actions to
meet them. It cannot be presumed to possess the fund of knowledge
essential for appraising issues largely military in nature, and,
consequently upon the advent of actual hostilities, it invariably
displays a reluctance to countermand the executive and legislative
branches, no matter how extreme their action. Furthermore, the
judicial process with its haphazard accretion of cases, the manifest
capacity of government to make cases moot, or failure to prosecute,
frequently makes it impossible for the Court even to review significant
controversies produced by action of the political departments. For
every Milligan or Duncan who manages to bring his case to the Court
(usually for post mortem relief), there are hundreds who submit to
abusive governmental action without ever contesting the validity
thereof. This alone affords adequate demonstration that the court
is ineffective in maintaining constitutionalism in time of war. For
fulfillment of this objective vigilance on the part of Congress and the
Executive no less than the electorate is imperative.

In a democracy the function of defending liberty cannot safely be
relegated to any single institution.


A MORE EFFECTIVE EMERGENCY ROLE FOR THE JUDICIARY

Judicial oversight of government emergency action has suffered from
concentration upon the question of the existence of power. In the
context of emergency the Court can best preserve for itself and the
Federal judicial system a meaningful role in preserving constitutional
processes if it is invited to measure the consistency of executive
action both to executive standards and congressional grants of
power,[753] rather than to rhetorically assert a right to admonish
a government--Congress and President, armed, mobilized and engaged
in war, that the measures which it employs for protection of the
nation are unconstitutional. In testing the vires of administrative
action the courts are acting in an area vital to the preservation of
responsible government, and in which cooperative legislative-executive
validation of judicially disapproved action represents the essence of
constitutionalism rather than constitutional immorality.[754]


THE STEEL SEIZURE CASES[755]

When, on April 8, 1952, President Truman issued Executive Order 10340
directing seizure of the steel industry,[756] he set in motion a train
of events which were to culminate in an historic series of concurring
opinions which may herald a significant change in emphasis on the part
of the Court. The effect of the majority and concurring opinions in
this case is effectively to curb and subject to Congressional sanction
a kind of “homemade prerogative”[757] which the President had asserted,
and to reassert the primacy of the Court’s role as a balancing agent in
the constitutional system. Four days before issuance of the Executive
Order, the C.I.O. United Steelworkers of America had given notice
of a nation-wide strike to begin on April 9.[758] Alleging in his
Order that such a strike would undermine American attempts to fulfill
international responsibilities, to maintain a steady supply of war
materials to the fighting force in Korea, and to maintain the domestic
economy of the nation, the President invoked “the authority vested in
me by the Constitution and laws of the United States, and as President
of the United States and Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces of the
United States,” as his legal justification for directing the Secretary
of Commerce “to take possession of” the steel plants.

On April 9th, Judge Alexander Holtzoff in the United States District
Court for the District of Columbia rejected the application of
Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co., _et al._, for an injunction and
declaratory judgment protecting the mills from seizure by the Secretary
of Commerce.[759] The District Court stated two grounds in support of
its ruling. (1) While it might technically run against Secretary of
Commerce Sawyer, an injunction “actually and in essence ... would be
an injunction against the President.” (2) The steel companies had not
shown irreparable harm.[760]

Three weeks later the steel companies instituted new proceedings
before Judge David A. Pine of the District Court, District of
Columbia.[761] Injunctive relief was now sought on grounds that the
seizure of the mills, not having been authorized by statute, was
unconstitutional.[762] The government’s presentation was completely
prejudiced by the insistence of the Assistant Attorney General that the
President’s actions be upheld on grounds of his “inherent” emergency
powers.[763]

The Court: “And is it ... your view that the powers of the Government
are limited by and enumerated in the Constitution of the United States?”

Mr. Baldridge: “That is true, Your Honor, with respect to legislative
powers.”

The Court: “But it is not true, you say, as to the Executive?”

Mr. Baldridge: “No.”

The Court: “So, when the sovereign people adopted the Constitution, it
enumerated the powers set up in the Constitution but limited the powers
of the Congress and limited the powers of the judiciary, but it did not
limit the powers of the Executive. Is that what you say?”

Mr. Baldridge: “That is the way we read Article II of the
Constitution.”[764]

Judge Pine ruled that the President’s action was unsupported by law and
granted the injunction.

While the government’s claim to an inherent emergency power may
have been extreme, it was a natural culmination of the trend of
judicial and scholarly interpretation of emergency powers through the
Second World War. Two authoritative sources existed, each providing
plausible underpinning for executive assertion of inherent emergency
powers--unlimited by Constitution, Congress or Court. The first was
judicial language such as the Sutherland dicta in _United States_ v.
_Curtiss-Wright_.[765] The second embraced commentaries by persons
generally considered qualified to write exegeses on the Constitution,
wherein the previously unchallenged exercise of emergency power by
the President has been viewed as controlling precedent legitimizing
the acquisition of such power. Thus, as of 1952, in the minds of
many, the President had built up imposing historical precedent for
the exercise of executive discretion adequate to accomplish whatever
purposes appeared to him essential to counter an emergency.[766] In
many instances, however, such action has frequently violated explicit
provisions of the Constitution or of congressional statutes.[767]

Justice Frankfurter indicated his acceptance of the validity of this
line of reasoning when in his concurring opinion in the _Steel Seizure_
cases he asserted that “... a systematic, unbroken, executive practice,
long pursued to the knowledge of the Congress and never before
questioned, engaged in by Presidents who have also sworn to uphold the
Constitution, making as it were such exercise of power part of the
structure of our government, may be treated as a gloss on ‘executive
power’ vested in the President by Sec. 1 of Ar. II.”[768]

By the ruling sustained, however, the District Court and the majority
of the Supreme Court lent color of authority to the steel companies’
contention that “There could be no more dangerous principle--nor one
more foreign to the Constitution--than a rule that past illegality
can through some legerdemain serve as authority to legalize present
illegality.”[769] Justice Jackson disposed of the Solicitor General’s
contention that although Congress had not provided for seizure of
the steel mills, the practice of past Presidents did authorize it,
by stating that while it was not surprising that the Government
should seek support for nebulous, inherent powers in the customs and
unadjudicated claims of preceding administrations, “a judge cannot
accept [executive self-assertions of power] ... as authority in
answering a constitutional question.... Prudence has counseled that
actual reliance on such nebulous claims stop short of provoking a
judicial test.”[770]

The government went into the Court of Appeals, District of Columbia
Circuit, seeking an order staying the injunction pending submission
of a petition for _certiorari_ to the Supreme Court.[771] The order
was granted[772] on May 2, and the following day the Supreme Court
granted _certiorari_, staying the District Court order pending final
disposition of the cases.[773]

Avoiding the bold and indiscreet assertion of undefined inherent powers
which had so prejudiced the government’s case in the District Court,
Solicitor General Philip B. Perlman on appeal to the Supreme Court
submitted a brief devoted to establishing the existence of an emergency
of sufficient magnitude to warrant extraordinary action on the part
of the executive.[774] As assurance of the President’s willingness
to subject himself to the desires of Congress, the brief cited his
communication to the Senate of April 21, 1952, offering to adhere to
any positive line of action prescribed by Congress.[775] The remainder
of the brief enumerates the historical and judicial precedent affording
a legal justification of the steel seizure[776] and concludes with an
argument to the effect that the proper remedy available to the steel
companies was suit for just compensation in the Court of Claims.[777]

In the light of the facts of the case counsel for the steel companies
could most efficiently sustain their contentions by emphasizing the
impropriety of executive seizure in plain opposition to the obvious
intent of Congress expressed in a statute anticipating such emergency
and explicitly providing a different solution. They avoided challenging
the constitutionality in the absence of a statute of an emergency
power to seize private productive facilities. In fact, the steel
companies openly conceded the existence of broad emergency power.
They made it clear that their view “does not mean that the Government
is powerless to deal with the threat to steel production which arises
from the current labor dispute.” If necessary “... Congress can
legislate appropriately and specifically to protect the nation from
threatened disaster.”[778] The determining factor in assessing the
legitimacy of government action in this case, however, was the nature
of the legislative-executive relationship involved. Presidential
action, the companies argued, could be arranged on a “spectrum” of
legitimacy[779]--at one end, cooperative executive-legislative action.
Congress and President might unite in the execution of a program or
Congress subsequently might ratify a prior exercise of power by the
executive.[780] At the other end, as in this case, the presidential
action violates a clear congressional intent.[781]

Here “... the statutory processes have been ignored ...,”[782] and
an early but eminent constitutional precedent was cited as squarely
meeting the instant situation. An Act passed by Congress in 1799
suspended commercial intercourse between the United States and
France during the undeclared naval war between the two nations. The
act provided that no American vessel should be permitted to proceed
to any French port under penalty of forfeiture, and authorized the
seizure of all American ships bound _to_ any French ports. President
Adams instructed commanders of United States armed vessels to
seize all American ships bound _to_ or _from_ French ports. Acting
under these presidential instructions, Captain Little stopped and
seized on the high seas a vessel bound _from_ a French port. The
Court through Chief Justice John Marshall held that Congress had
prescribed by its legislation the manner of which seizures were to
be carried into execution and had excluded the seizure of any vessel
bound _from_ rather than _to_ a French port. And even though the
executive construction was calculated to increase the effectiveness
of the legislation, the executive had no right to expand the law as
enacted.[783]

Justice Black for the majority of the Court rejected the notion that
unchallenged emergency action by former Presidents provided any solid
legal precedent for Truman’s seizure of the steel mills.[784] “The
President’s power to issue the order must stem either from an act of
Congress or from the Constitution itself.”[785] The seizure order could
not be sustained by any of the constitutional grants of executive power
to the President.[786] The President, rather than basing his order
upon a specific statute, had chosen to direct “that a presidential
policy be executed in a manner prescribed by the President.”[787] Black
did not question “the power of Congress to adopt such public policies
as those proclaimed by the order.” The action of the President in
initiating such a policy was, however, an unconstitutional arrogation
of “lawmaking power” to the executive.[788]

Justice Black avoided citation of judicial precedent in that portion of
his opinion which invalidated the President’s action. The reason for
this is clear, and has been stated succinctly by Professor Edward S.
Corwin in comments upon the _Steel Seizure_ cases:

“The doctrine of the case, as stated in Justice Black’s opinion of the
Court, while purporting to stem from the principle of separation of
powers, is a purely arbitrary construction created out of hand for the
purpose of disposing of this particular case, and is altogether devoid
of historical verification.”[789]

Each of the six justices who concurred in Black’s majority opinion
in the _Steel Seizure_ cases stated his reasons in full.[790] By
far the most lucid, best reasoned, and most adequate of any of
the opinions appears to be that of Justice Jackson. He avoided
the oversimplification of issues which weakens Black’s opinion.
Filling the theoretical lacunae which Black in his hasty advance
to the target (invalidation of Truman’s action) left in his wake,
Jackson recognized that the real issue of the case was not that the
President had taken emergency action unsupported by a declaration
of legislative policy, but that his measures had been “incompatible
with the expressed or implied will of Congress.”[791] Justice Jackson
founded his opinion upon the concept of our government as a “balanced
power structure.”[792] The Constitution disperses power among the
branches of government, but contemplates that practice will achieve
the integration essential to effective government. “Interdependence”
rather than “separateness” is the relationship that must exist. The
powers of a President in time of emergency are not, as the Government
had argued, comprehensive and undefined; neither are they fixed,
“but fluctuate, depending upon their disjunction or conjunction
with those of Congress.”[793] Jackson enumerates alternatives of
Presidential-Congressional relationships which may determine the extent
of executive power:

“1. When the President acts pursuant to an express or implied
authorization of Congress, his authority is at its maximum, for it
includes all that he possesses in his own right plus all that Congress
can delegate....

“2. When the President acts in absence of either a congressional grant
or denial of authority, he can only rely upon his own independent
powers....

“3. When the President takes measures incompatible with the expressed
or implied will of Congress, his power is at its lowest ebb, for
then he can rely only upon his own constitutional powers minus any
constitutional powers of Congress over the matter....”[794]

The seizure of the steel mills by President Truman in face of a
contrary congressional policy fell into the third of these categories
and left presidential power “most vulnerable to attack and in the
least favorable of possible constitutional postures.” The Court could
sustain the President’s action “only by holding that seizure of such
strike-bound industries is within his domain and beyond control by
Congress.”[795]

Also concurring, Mr. Justice Clark relied on the precedent of
_Little_ v. _Barreme_.[796] Although “the Constitution does grant to
the President extensive authority in times of grave and imperative
emergency”[797] and in the absence of Congressional action “the
President’s independent power to act depends upon the gravity of
the situation confronting the nation,”[798] the lesson of _Little_
v. _Barreme_ and sound constitutional exposition demand that “where
Congress has laid down specific procedures to deal with the type of
crisis confronting the President, he must follow those procedures in
meeting the crisis....”[799]

In his dissenting opinion Chief Justice Vinson maintained that the
majority justices had each assumed the unarticulated major premise
that the emergency was not of sufficient gravity to warrant the
mode of action adopted by the President. The Chief Justice chided
his colleagues for not weighing the magnitude of the emergency
accurately.[800] But this seems hardly a warrantable criticism of a
group of opinions which manifested little concern with substantive
constitutional limitations upon executive emergency action, but rather
emphasized the necessity for compliance with a congressional program
anticipating such an emergency and prescribing the mode of response to
it.


THE STEEL STRIKE OF 1959

In 1959 the nation’s great steel industry once again occupied the
center of a dispute which had far reaching consequences.

The dispute was that between representatives of the twelve largest
steel producers in the United States and representatives of the
United Steelworkers of America, the union representing most of the
non-supervisory employees employed in the steel industry.

As the time for negotiating new contracts between the union and the
steel companies drew near the deadline date of June 30, 1959, it
became evident to representatives of both labor and management that
no agreement for new contracts would be reached. Shortly before the
June 30th deadline the parties agreed at the request of President
Eisenhower, to extend the old agreements for two weeks. By July 15,
there was still no settlement, and a strike by 500,000 steelworkers
began immediately.

From July until early November the steelworkers refused to return
to their jobs. Although negotiations continued between union and
management representatives no settlement of the dispute was reached.
The President sought during the 116 day old strike to have the strike
settled without recourse to the Labor-Management Relations Act
(Taft-Hartley) of 1947. On September 8, President Eisenhower wrote a
letter to the United Steelworkers of America and to the steel companies
in which he expressed disappointment that so little progress toward
settlement of the steel dispute had been made, and he urged the parties
to act expeditiously to reach agreement.[801]

As the impact of the strike was felt in an ever-widening sector of the
American economy, the President of the United States took the first
step under the Labor Management Relations Act of 1947[802] by issuing
Executive Order No. 10843 pursuant to section 206 of the Act.[803] He
appointed a board of inquiry to inquire into the issues involved in the
dispute and to make a written report to him. In the Executive Order,
the President expressed the opinion that the strike, if permitted to
continue would imperil the national health and safety. In his statement
explaining his issuance of the Executive Order, the President pointed
to the “shutting off” of practically all new supplies of steel, the
unemployment of hundreds of thousands of employees in steel and related
industries, and the imminent threat to the economic health of the
nation if production was not quickly resumed.

The Board of Inquiry submitted its written report to the President
on October 19[804] setting forth a summary of the negotiations up to
October 19 and the issues in dispute between the parties.[805] The
Board concluded that “we see no prospects for an early cessation of the
strike. The Board cannot point to any single issue of any consequence
whatsoever upon which the parties are in agreement.”[806]

Upon receiving the report, the President directed the Attorney General
to petition any district court having jurisdiction over the parties to
enjoin the continuance of the strike and to order such other relief as
might be necessary or appropriate.

On October 20, 1959, the Attorney General filed a petition in the
United States District Court for the Western District of Pennsylvania,
seeking an injunction against the union and the steel companies
pursuant to section 208 of the Taft-Hartley Act.[807] The Government’s
petition described the requisite statutory steps which had been taken
by the President, and alleged that prolongation of the widespread
strike in the steel industry would imperil the health and safety of the
country. In summary form the petition stated some of the consequences
of the strike on employment, both in the steel industry and many other
areas of the economy, on the availability of essential steel products,
and on vital national defense projects.[808] The strike had shut down
approximately 85 percent of the steel producing capacity of the United
States. More than 765,000 persons had been made idle by the strike.
If it were allowed to continue, strike-caused unemployment would have
reached three million by January 1, 1960.

A considerable amount of evidence was presented concerning the effect
of the strike on the national defense program. The District Court found
that certain steel products needed in connection with some aspects of
the defense program were unavailable because of the steel strike.

Particular stress was put on the impact of the tie-up on the output
of missiles, nuclear submarines and advanced types of rocket engines.
The Defense Department reported that two plants supplying component’s
for the Polaris missile had been forced to stop production for lack
of alloy steel and four others had given notice of the need to do
the same within a few days.[809] Moreover, the top priority Project
Mercury, an essential part of the nation’s space program was being
injured. Exported steel products, vital to the support of the nation’s
overseas bases, for NATO, and similar collective security groups would
be cut off; continuance of the strike would impair these programs, thus
imperiling the national safety.

On these facts, the District Court made the conclusory finding that
the strike imperiled the national health and safety and issued an
injunction. The court rejected the union’s argument that the statute is
unconstitutional because it authorizes the court to issue an injunction
which does not enforce a pre-existing legal obligation, but merely
creates such an obligation. The court did not pass on the union’s
further argument that it should, in the exercise of its equitable
discretion, refuse to issue an injunction in this case.

The union promptly filed an appeal and moved the District Court for a
brief stay to enable the Union to apply to Judge Staley of the Court of
Appeals for the Third Circuit for a stay pending appeal.

The Court of Appeals affirmed the judgment of the District Court.
Chief Judge Biggs, writing for the majority, analyzed and rejected the
union’s contention that there was no “case or controversy” before the
federal court which it could adjudicate in the sense required by the
Constitution. Turning to the critical findings of the District Court
dealing with the impact of the steel strike, the majority concluded,
after a detailed review of the entire record, that the findings of the
lower court were not clearly erroneous. Significantly, the majority
noted that:

“We cannot accept the Union’s argument in this respect. If our
conclusion is correct that there is sufficient evidence in the record
of the present or future danger to national health or safety, we
conclude that the danger is great enough and calls for a remedy as
sweeping as the law will permit. Whether the remedy provided by the
Labor-Management Relations Act is sufficient to accomplish a cessation
of labor strife is a question not for this court but for Congress. We
conclude, therefore, that the court below did not abuse its discretion
in granting the relief which the United States prayed for.”[810]

The Supreme Court acted with unusual speed. The Court set Tuesday,
November 3, 1959 at 11 a.m. as the time for oral argument. All briefs
had to be on file by noon, Monday, November 2, 1959. The injunction
issued by the U. S. District Court for the Western District of
Pennsylvania on October 21, 1959 as modified by the United States
Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit on October 22, 1959, was stayed
pending the issuance of the judgment of Supreme Court. The petition for
_certiorari_, was filed by the union counsel at 1 p.m. The Government’s
response, asking the court to deny review and thus let the injunction
stand, arrived about 4 p.m.

Half an hour later the nine Justices met in conference, the session
lasting 40 minutes. Reporters learned of the unscheduled meeting from
the ringing of gongs that call the Justices to all formal conferences.
Out of the session came an order in the case entitled _United Steel
Workers of America_, Petitioner v. _United States_, _et al._[811]

The Supreme Court’s opinion was brief. In the _Per Curiam_ Opinion, the
Court stated its acceptance of, and concurrence in, the findings of the
lower Federal Courts which had adjudicated the case:

“... Petitioner here contests the findings that the continuation of
the strike would imperil the national health and safety. The parties
dispute the meaning of the statutory term ‘national health’; the
Government insists that the term comprehends the country’s general
well-being, its economic health; petitioner urges that simply the
physical health of the citizenry is meant. We need not resolve this
question, for we think the judgment ... is amply supported on the
ground that the strike imperils the national safety. Here we rely upon
the evidence of the strike’s effect on specific defense projects; we
need not pass on the Government’s contention that ‘national safety’ in
this context should be given a broader construction and application.

“... The statute was designed to provide a public remedy in times of
emergency; we cannot construe it to require that the United States
either formulate a reorganization of the affected industry to satisfy
its defense needs without the complete reopening of closed facilities,
or demonstrate in court the unfeasibility of such a reorganization.
There is no room in the statute for this requirement which the
petitioner seeks to impose on the Government.”[812]

The steel strike was finally settled on January 4, 1960, following
all-night negotiations between the Vice-President, the Secretary of
Labor, representatives of the steel companies and representatives
of the steel companies and representatives of the steelworker’s
union. Vice-President Nixon and Secretary of Labor Mitchell, acting
under instructions from President Eisenhower, had been conducting
negotiations for several weeks with the parties to the dispute.

While all parties involved were gratified to have this long and costly
strike ended, the method of settlement does not confirm the efficacy of
the emergency provision of the Taft-Hartley Act. Indeed, it is further
confirmation of the fact that the American approach to emergency powers
has imposed upon successive executives, not only the incentive, but
the absolute need to resort to extra-statutory means for settling
emergencies.




CHAPTER XI CONCLUSIONS


The doctrine of constitutional dictatorship is inappropriate for
analysis of the problem of democratic response to emergency.

Judicial review of a chief executive’s finding that an emergency
exists amounts to involvement of Supreme Court Justices in a genre
of decision-making which should more properly be performed by the
President and Congress, although the 1959 Steel Seizure decision
reveals the effective role which the Supreme Court may play in holding
the President to the forms of emergency action prescribed by the
Congress, if the Congress has so prescribed them.

The recurrent trouble which the nation has confronted in taking timely
and effective emergency action at the national level stems from the
existence on the statute books of a confusing array of provisions for
the declaration of various kinds of emergency, and the excessively
precise definition of the techniques which must be employed in coping
with the emergency. This invites efforts at evasion of statutory
limitations as in the instance of the 1952 steel strike, or requires
recurrent special legislation dealing with successive particularized
emergencies. Also, in forewarning the private parties in dispute, in
the case of a strike, of the precise time-table and program of action
to which the executive must adhere, it may lessen their incentive to
settle the dispute, for the course of action prescribed by statute may,
depending upon the situation, strengthen the bargaining position of one
of the disputants.

The recent use of the concurrent resolution in Congress provides a key
to the means for equipping the President with the broad discretion
he should have to identify conditions warranting emergency action,
and to select the appropriate tools to deal with an emergency, while
simultaneously keeping him under Congressional surveillance and control.

We propose a generic statute to empower the President to proclaim a
national or regional emergency. Under such a proclamation the President
may issue rules and regulations which have the force of law. A
proclamation of emergency would be placed before the Congress within
twenty-four hours of its issuance. If Congress were not in session,
it would be called into session within five days from the time of the
declaration of emergency. The proclamation of emergency would stand
unless revoked by concurrent resolution by both Houses of Congress
within five days of Congress’ coming into special session.

The rules and regulations issued under the proclamation would be
similarly subject to revocation by concurrent resolution and Congress
should possess the item veto in this respect; i.e., it may revoke one
rule, while permitting others to stand. An emergency proclamation and
regulations issued under it, would automatically expire after thirty
days, but would be subject to reissuance by the President, provided
the Congress concurred. Congress, upon the issuance of an emergency
proclamation would establish a scrutiny committee on emergency powers,
patterned after the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy. Congress would
maintain continuous scrutiny of the administration of powers exercised
under the proclamation. The Committee’s primary responsibility would
be to keep Congress sufficiently advised as to whether powers had been
responsibly administered.

There is nothing novel about this proposal. The British have operated
under similar statutes in peace and war for fifty years with a record
of great success in two respects:

(1) They reacted efficiently to emergencies ranging from a dock strike,
and a general strike to two world wars;

(2) Powers during an emergency have been responsibly administered under
Parliamentary observation and control.

Under this plan, the Executive can act, fully cloaked with legitimacy
to respond to emergencies ranging from a hydrogen attack to a capital
transit strike, and might employ techniques ranging from replacement of
state and local administrations which have been destroyed by hydrogen
bombings, to compelling motor-car men to return to work.

Such a statute exemplifies our commitment to democratic government and
democratic theory in a number of ways. It provides legislative sanction
for executive action and precludes the coming into being of a situation
which in the words of Locke, “the executive has to act in the absence
of law,” and it gives the President sufficiently broad and generic
power. As contrasted with the unrealistically detailed and restrictive
emergency provisions of existing statues, the President is empowered to
deal with an emergency without the need to resort to the use of Locke’s
prerogative: to act under the law, in the absence of the law, or even
contrary to the law. In effect it renders unnecessary and unlikely that
a future President will define the alternatives which Lincoln once
perceived: to act under the Constitution and lose the Union, or to save
the Union by transgressing against the Constitution.

Some persons will fear that a President might take action unnecessarily
under such a proclamation of emergency. The answer to this is
three-fold: first, it is in the nature of our political system that we
must repose a certain amount of faith in the basic integrity and wisdom
of the Chief Executive; secondly, the President must operate within
carefully prescribed procedural limitations; and third, the President
has only today to declare a nation-wide state of martial law in order
to equip himself with vast power to take emergency action virtually
free from concurring legislative participation.

The vital lesson which emerges from this study is that it is
possible to equip government to cope with the crises of Twentieth
Century existence without surrendering the two vital principles of
constitutionalism that have marked the course of American political
development: the maintenance of legal limits to arbitrary power, and
political responsibility of the government to the governed.




REFERENCES


CHAPTER I

[1] Stanford Research Institute, _Impact of Air Attack in World War II;
Selected Data for Civil Defense Planning_, especially Division II, vol.
1, “Economic Effects:--Germany” (Federal Civil Defense Administration,
1953).

[2] _Id._, Division III, vols. 1 and 2, “Social Organization, Behavior,
and Morale Under Stress of Bombing,” and Irving L. Janis, _Air War and
Emotional Stress_ (McGraw-Hill, 1951, for the Rand Corporation).

[3] Robert Connery, _The Navy and Industrial Mobilization in World War
II_ (Princeton University Press, 1951) p. 6.

[4] Exemplified by Justice Davis’s decision for the majority of the
Court in _Ex parte Milligan_, 4 Wall. 2, 120-21, 126 (1866):

“The Constitution of the United States is a law for rulers and
people, equally in war and in peace, and covers with the shield
of its protection all classes of men, at all times, and under all
circumstances. No doctrine, involving more pernicious consequences was
ever invented by the wit of man than that any of its provisions can
be suspended during any of the great exigencies of government. Such
a doctrine leads directly to anarchy or despotism; but the theory of
necessity on which it is based is false; for the government, within the
constitution, has all the powers granted to it, which are necessary to
preserve its existence....

“... It could well be said that a country, preserved at the sacrifice
of all the cardinal principles of liberty, is not worth the cost of
preservation.”

[5] Justice Sutherland for the Court in the 1936 case of _United States
v. Curtiss-Wright Export Corporation_, 299 U. S. 304, 316-18:

“And since the states severally never possessed international powers,
such powers could not have been carved from the mass of state powers
but obviously were transmitted to the United States from some other
source....

“It results that the investment of the federal government with the
powers of external sovereignty did not depend upon the affirmative
grants of the Constitution. The powers to declare and wage war, to
conclude peace, to make treaties, to maintain diplomatic relations
with other sovereignties, if they had never been mentioned in the
Constitution, would have been vested in the federal government as
necessary concomitants of nationality.”

[6] Justice Jackson, dissenting in the Japanese relocation case,
_Korematsu_ v. _United States_, 323 U. S. 214, 248 (1944) admonished
the Court as follows:

“But I would not lead people to rely on this Court for a review that
seems to me wholly delusive. The military reasonableness of these
orders can only be determined by the military superiors. If the people
ever let command of the war power fall in irresponsible hands, the
courts wield no power equal to its restraint. The chief restraint upon
those who command the physical forces of the country in the future, as
in the past, must be their responsibilities to the political judgments
of their contemporaries and to the moral judgments of history.”

[7] The words are, of course, those of John Locke, _Of Civil
Government_, Bk. II, Ch. XIV.

The studies referred to include: Edward S. Corwin, _The President:
Office and Powers_ (New York: New York University Press, 3rd ed.,
1948); and _Total War and the Constitution_ (New York: Knopf, 1947);
Clarence Berdahl, _War Powers of the Executive in the United States_,
(Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1921); Clinton L. Rossiter,
_Constitutional Dictatorship_ (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1948) and _The Supreme Court and the Commander in Chief_ (Ithaca:
Cornell University Press, 1951); Wilfred E. Binkley, _President and
Congress_ (New York: Knopf, 1947); Bennett M. Rich, _The President
and Civil Disorder_ (Washington, D. C.: Brookings, 1941); Louis W.
Koenig, _The Presidency and the Crisis_ (New York: King’s Crown Press,
1944); John W. Burgess, Ch. XXVIII, vol. 2, _The Civil War and the
Constitution_ (New York: Scribners, 1901); James Hart, _The Ordinance
Making Powers of the President of the United States_ (Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins Press, 1925); James G. Randall, _Constitutional Problems Under
Lincoln_, rev. ed. (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1951); and
a recent article by Albert L. Sturm, “Emergencies and the President,”
11 _Journal of Politics_, 121, 1949, in which he says, “Lincoln’s
precedents have afforded warrant for his aggressive successors to
meet extraordinary needs with extraordinary remedies, despite their
doubtful constitutionality.” Perhaps as broad a claim to an executive
prerogative as has been made in the United States is that which Lucius
Wilmerding, Jr., bases upon his study of _The Spending Power_ (New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1943): “There are certain circumstances
which constitute a law of necessity and self-preservation and which
render the _salus populi_ supreme over the written law. The officer who
is called to act upon this superior ground does indeed risk himself
on the justice of the controlling powers of the Constitution, but his
station makes it his duty to incur that risk.” p. 12.

[8] Edward S. Corwin strongly emphasizes that incident in his _The
President: Office and Powers_ (New York: New York University Press, 3rd
ed., 1948), pp. 303-6.

[9] This is the doctrine which would seem to emerge from _Youngstown
Sheet and Tube Co. v. Sawyer_, 343 U. S. 579 (1952), in which the Court
rejected contentions on behalf of President Truman that he enjoyed
an “inherent” emergency power to seize private industry in time of
emergency occasioned by work stoppages.

[10] This study should not be interpreted as an effort to catalog
exhaustively _existing_ delegations of emergency powers to the
President. Statutes of the era 1933 to 1955 are analyzed without regard
to their present status as expired or in force.


CHAPTER II

[11] Suspension of the writ, and declaration of martial law were, of
course, as simulated in the raid itself. The story of the exercise may
be traced in the _New York Times_, June 16, 1955, pp. 1, 16; June 17,
1955, pp. 1, 10, 11. The full text of the proclamation is available
in Senate Committee on Armed Forces, Subcommittee on Civil Defense,
_Hearings on the Civil Defense Program_, Part II, p. 746 (1955). Cf.
Professor Charles Fairman’s remarks in “Government under Law in Time of
Crisis,” a paper presented at the Marshall Bicentennial Conference,
Harvard Law School, September 1955: “Indeed it is rather a matter
for shame that we take so little thought for the morrow. More than
mere individual self-preservation is at stake. If we believe that the
Western Civilization we know is worth maintaining, if we are devoted
to the conceptions of law and justice as they have been defined in the
course of our history, then surely we should be moved to make them
secure.”

[12] _Id._ It is this idea that emergency may require executive
action contrary to the law, _i.e._, a suspension of law which is
most dangerous to constitutional morality. It presents the executive
with false alternatives: “Was it possible to lose the nation and
yet preserve the Constitution?... I felt that measures otherwise
unconstitutional might become lawful by becoming indispensable to the
preservation of the nation.” Abraham Lincoln, letter to A. C. Hodges,
April 4, 1864, Henry J. Raymond, _The Life and Public Service of
Abraham Lincoln_ (New York: Derby & Miller, 1865), p. 767.


DEMOCRATIC POLITICAL THEORISTS

[13] Bk. II, Ch. XIV.

[14] _Id._

[15] Locke, _op. cit._, Bk. II, Ch. XIV.

[16] _Id._

[17] _The Social Contract_ (New York: Dutton, 1950), pp. 123-24.

[18] _Id._, at 125. Cf. Frederick M. Watkins’ findings regarding
the use of Article 48 of the Weimar Constitution. _The Failure of
Constitutional Emergency Powers Under the German Republic._ (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1939.)

[19] _Id._, at 124-125.

[20] _Representative Government_ (New York: Dutton, 1950), pp. 274,
277-78.

[21] Edmund Silberner, _The Problem of War in the Nineteenth Century
Economic Thought_ (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1946), p.
66ff.

[22] _Id._, at 46.

[23] _Id._, at 62.


MACHIAVELLI

[24] _The Discourses_, Bk. 1, Ch. XXXIV.

[25] In contrast to Mill, Machiavelli’s use of the term “dictator” is
loose and misleading. The so-called dictator was really a temporary
emergency executive who by no means enjoyed absolute power.

[26] _The Discourses_, Bk. 1, Ch. XXXIV.

[27] _Id._, at Ch. XXXV.


CONTEMPORARY THEORISTS

[28] _The Failure of Constitutional Emergency Powers Under the German
Republic_, _op. cit._, p. 148.

[29] See his “The Problem of Constitutional Dictatorship,” p. 324ff.
in Carl J. Friedrich and Edward S. Mason (editors) _Public Policy_
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1940).

[30] _Id._, at p. 328.

[31] _Id._, at 353.

[32] _Id._, at 351.

[33] _Id._, at 356-58.

[34] _Id._, at 338-41.

[35] _Id._, at 338.

[36] _Constitutional Government and Democracy_, Ch. XXVI, rev. ed.
(Boston: Ginn & Co., 1949).

[37] _Id._, at 573.

[38] _Id._, at 580.

[39] _Id._, 574-584.

[40] _Id._, at 584.

[41] Clinton L. Rossiter, _Constitutional Dictatorship_ (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1948), p. 288ff.

[42] Here, citing Friedrich, he observes “there might well have
been no crisis in 1933 if President Roosevelt had been required to
appoint another to wield the abnormal display of power which he seemed
to find so necessary at the moment.” _Id._, at 303. But since he
later specifically advocates retention of what he describes as “the
inherent emergency power of the President” (p. 308), why hobble it by
discouraging a presidential finding of the existence of an emergency?
Cf. Grier, J., in _Prize Cases_, 2 Black 635, 669-71 (1862), holding
that war (emergency) may commence when the Chief Executive takes up a
proferred challenge.

[43] Rossiter, _op. cit._, pp. 298-306.

[44] _Id._, at 310-11.

[45] _Id._, at 309.

[46] _The Supreme Court and the Commander in Chief_ (Ithaca: Cornell
University Press, 1951), p. 1, see p. 19 _infra_.


CONTEMPORARY THEORIES IN THE LIGHT OF RECENT EXPERIENCE.

[47] _Op. cit._, p. 573.

[48] _Constitutionalism Ancient and Modern_ (Ithaca: Cornell University
Press, 1940), p. 180.

[49] _Id._, at 246.

[50] _Id._, at 1.

[51] _Id._, at 146.

[52] Justice Jackson’s concurring opinion in _Youngstown Sheet & Tube
Co._ v. _Sawyer_, 343 U. S. 579 at 634-55 (1952), in which he discusses
the relative power of the President acting under his executive powers
alone, and acting under a marriage of executive and congressional
powers, is opposite here.

[53] Note William Y. Elliott’s theory of the co-organic society, in
_The Pragmatic Revolt in Politics_, (New York: Macmillan, 1928), pp.
355-77.

[54] See Cecil T. Carr, _Delegated Legislation_ (Cambridge: University
Press, 1921) p. 72, and _Concerning English Administrative Law_ (New
York: Columbia University Press, 1941), p. 189; Lord Hewart of Bury,
_The New Despotism_ (New York: Cosmopolitan Book Corporation, 1929), p.
308; W. A. Robson, _Justice and Administrative Law_ (London: Stevens,
1945), p. 385, and Marguerite A. Sieghart, _Government by Decree_
(London: Stevens, 1950), p. 343.


CHAPTER III

[55] The Emergency Powers (Defense) Act, 1939, 2 & 3 Geo. 6, Ch. 62,
Sec. 1.

[56] 61 Stat. 136, June 23, 1947, Sec. 206, 29 U.S.C. 176.


EMERGENCIES VARY IN INTENSITY

[57] Proclamation No. 2076, 48 Stat. 1734, February 16, 1934.

[58] 63 Stat. 208, June 20, 1949, Sec. 10 (b).

[59] Proclamation No. 2352, 54 Stat. 2643, September 8, 1939.

[60] 48 Stat. 354, February 23, 1934, Sec. 2 (b).

[61] Bank Conservation Act, 48 Stat. 1, March 9, 1933, Preamble.

[62] Proclamation No. 2153, 49 Stat. 3489, January 10, 1936.

[63] Veterans’ Emergency Housing Act, 60 Stat. 207, May 22, 1946, Sec.
1 (a).

[64] Agricultural Adjustment Act, 48 Stat. 31, May 12, 1933, Sec. 1.

[65] Proclamation No. 2487, 55 Stat. 1647, May 27, 1941.


VARIETIES OF EMERGENCY


_Economic Emergencies_

[66] Proclamation No. 2039, 48 Stat. 1689, March 6, 1933.

[67] 48 Stat. 1, March 9, 1933. This was the first act of the new
Congress, Public Law No. 1.

[68] 48 Stat. 20, March 24, 1933.

[69] 48 Stat. 55, May 12, 1933, Sec. 1.

[70] 48 Stat. 798, May 24, 1934, Sec. 78.

[71] 48 Stat. 31, May 12, 1933, Sec. 1, the first Agricultural
Adjustment Act.

[72] 48 Stat. 337, January 30, 1934, Sec. 10 (c).

[73] Proclamation No. 2153, 49 Stat. 3489, January 10, 1936.

[74] 55 Stat. 395, June 30, 1941, Sec. 1.

[75] 67 Stat. 149, July 14, 1953, Sec. 1A.

[76] 48 Stat. 195, June 16, 1933, Sec. 1.

[77] 48 Stat. 881, June 6, 1934, Sec. 2 (4).

[78] 48 Stat. 943, June 12, 1934, Sec. 1.

[79] 56 Stat. 23, January 30, 1942, Sec. 1 (a).

[80] Proclamation No. 2487, 55 Stat. 2643, May 27, 1941.

[81] 60 Stat. 664, July 25, 1946, Sec. 1A (a).

[82] 56 Stat. 226, April 28, 1942, Sec. 403.

[83] 48 Stat. 211, June 16, 1933, Sec. 2.

[84] 48 Stat. 1185, June 21, 1934, Secs. 3-5.

[85] 57 Stat. 163, June 25, 1943, Sec. 3, 5-8.

[86] 61 Stat. 136, June 23, 1947, Sec. 206.

[87] 60 Stat 207, 1946, Sec. 1 (a).

[88] Proclamation No. 2708, 61 Stat. 1944, October 25, 1946; terminated
by Proclamation No. 2735, 61 Stat. 1073, June 28, 1947.

[89] 63 Stat. 18, March 30, 1949.

[90] 48 Stat. 1478, June 16, 1934.

[91] 48 Stat. 1275, June 28, 1934, Sec. 2.

[92] 50 Stat. 903, September 1, 1937, Sec. 509.

[93] Proclamation No. 2361, 54 Stat. 2654, September 11, 1939;
Proclamation No. 2551, 56 Stat. 1952, April 13, 1942; Proclamation No.
2757, 61 Stat. 1098, November 28, 1947.

[94] Proclamation No. 2545, 56 Stat. 1945, April 1, 1942.

[95] 46 Stat. 590, June 17, 1930, Sec. 318.

[96] Proclamation No. 2553, 56 Stat. 1954, April 27, 1942.


_Emergencies Occasioned by Natural Catastrophes_

[97] 48 Stat. 354, February 23, 1934, Sec. 1.

[98] 48 Stat. 1021, 1056, June 19, 1934.

[99] Proclamation No. 2092, 49 Stat. 3404, August 10, 1934.

[100] _Id._

[101] 48 Stat. 1064, June 19, 1934, Sec. 606 (c).

[102] 65 Stat. 611, October 24, 1951.

[103] 48 Stat. 20, March 23, 1933, earthquake; 48 Stat. 993, June 18,
1934, Sec. 3, floods, hurricanes, earthquakes, landslides; Disaster
Loan Corporation Act, 50 Stat. 19, February 11, 1937, “floods or other
catastrophes in the year 1937”; amendment to National Housing Act,
50 Stat. 70, April 22, 1937, “earthquake, conflagration, tornado,
cyclone, hurricane, flood, or other catastrophe”; Emergency Flood
Control Act, 59 Stat. 231, June 5, 1945, “floods, or windstorms,
or fire caused by lightning”; 61 Stat. 163, June 23, 1947, floods;
Interior Department Appropriation Act, 1948, 61 Stat. 460, July 25,
1947, Sec. 3, “emergency caused by fire, flood, storm, act of God,
or sabotage”; Flood Rehabilitation Act, 1952, 65 Stat. 615, October
24, 1951, “excessive rains, runoff, and flood-waters”; Reconstruction
Finance Corporation Liquidation Act, 67 Stat. 230, July 30, 1953, Sec.
202, “floods and other catastrophes”; Presidential Proclamations No.
2222, and 2223, January 23, and February 1, 1937, 50 Stat. 1810, 1811,
January 23, 1937 and February 1, 1937, “disastrous floods”, “flood
conditions.”

[104] 50 Stat. 57, April 6, 1937.

[105] 50 Stat. 120, April 27, 1937.

[106] 65 Stat. 69, June 15, 1951.

[107] Famine Relief Act, 67 Stat. 476, August 7, 1953, Sec. 1.


_National Security Emergencies_

[108] Proclamation No. 2352, September 8, 1959, 54 Stat. 2643.

[109] Proclamation No. 2487, 55 Stat. 1647, May 27, 1941.

[110] _Id._

[111] 54 Stat. 885, September 16, 1940, Sec. 3 (a).

[112] 65 Stat. 75, June 19, 1951, Sec. 3.

[113] 61 Stat. 460, 491-492, July 25, 1947, Sec. 5.

[114] 54 Stat. 1220, November 30, 1940.

[115] 64 Stat. 1257, January 12, 1951, Sec. 1.

[116] Proclamation No. 2519, 55 Stat. 1693, October 22, 1941.

[117] 64 Stat. 1245, January 12, 1951, Sec. 3 (a).

[118] _Id._, Sec. 301.

[119] 66 Stat. 315, July 1, 1952, Sec. 2 (a). Section 201 (g) of
the Civil Defense Act, _op. cit._, had encouraged such compacts and
provided for their automatic approval in the absence of exercise of the
congressional veto. Here, however, Congress resorted to the traditional
machinery, enacting a statute granting its consent.

[120] 46 Stat. 696, June 17, 1930, Sec. 318.

[121] 48 Stat. 1064, June 19, 1934, Sec. 606 (c); 65 Stat. 611, October
24, 1951, Sec. 1.

[122] 54 Stat. 213, May 14, 1940.

[123] 59 Stat. 166, May 9, 1945.

[124] Proclamation No. 2561, 56 Stat. 1964, July 2, 1942; not
dissimilar to the December 8, 1941 Proclamations No. 2526 and 2527
declaring the existence of a threatened “invasion or predatory
incursion ... by Germany” and by Italy. 55 Stat. 1705, 1707.

[125] Title II of the Internal Security Act of 1950, 64 Stat. 987,
1021, September 22, 1950, Sec. 102.


PERCEIVING THE EXISTENCE OF AN EMERGENCY

[126] 61 Stat. 34, March 31, 1947, Sec. 2.


CHAPTER IV

[127] Roy Macridis, _The Study of Comparative Government_ (New York:
Doubleday and Co., 1955), p. 24.


POSITIVE INTEGRATION

[128] 53 Stat. 855, June 27, 1939, Sec. 2.

[129] 54 Stat. 265, 297, June 11, 1940.

[130] 54 Stat. 712, July 2, 1940, Sec. 4.

[131] 54 Stat. 1092, October 10, 1940, Sec. 1.

[132] 56 Stat 176, March 27, 1942, Sec. 801.

[133] 60 Stat. 31, February 1946.

[134] 62 Stat. 604, June 24, 1948, Sec. 6 (h).

[135] 64 Stat. 798, September 8, 1950, Title V, Sec. 501-3.

[136] _Id._, Sec. 503.

[137] _Id._, Sec. 503.

[138] 64 Stat. 149, May 10, 1950, Sec. 3 (a) (8).

[139] _Id._, Sec. 37.

[140] 49 Stat. 391, June 19, 1955, Sec. 1.

[141] 49 Stat. 1028, August 30, 1935.

[142] 52 Stat. 220, April 22, 1938.

[143] 52 Stat. 221, April 25, 1938.

[144] _Id._

[145] 52 Stat. 641, June 11, 1938.

[146] 52 Stat. 1175, June 25, 1938, Sec. 1.

[147] _Id._, Sec. 2.

[148] _Id._, Sec. 4.

[149] 54 Stat 213, amending the 1916 National Defense Act, May 15, 1940.

[150] 55 Stat. 799, December 13, 1941, Sec. 1.

[151] _Id._, Sec. 1.

[152] _Id._, Sec. 1.

[153] 54 Stat. 858, August 27, 1940, Sec. 1.

[154] 54 Stat. 1206, October 21, 1940.

[155] 64 Stat. 318, June 30, 1950, Sec. 2.

[156] 64 Stat. 1072, September 27, 1950.

[157] 54 Stat. 885, September 16, 1940.

[158] _Id._, Sec. 2.

[159] _Id._, Sec. 3 (a).

[160] _Id._, Sec. 2 (a), (b).

[161] 54 Stat. 2739, 2745, 2747, 2760.

[162] 55 Stat. 1644, 56 Stat. 1929, January 5, 1942.

[163] 62 Stat. 604, June 1948, The Selective Service Act of 1948.

[164] _Id._, Sec. 3, 4.

[165] _Id._, Sec. 2, 4.

[166] 64 Stat. 826, September 9, 1950.

[167] 64 Stat. 254, June 23, 1950.

[168] 64 Stat. 318, July 9, 1951.

[169] 65 Stat. 75, June 19, 1951.

[170] 67 Stat. 86, June 29, 1953, all secs.

[171] 67 Stat. 174, July 16, 1953.

[172] 53 Stat. 854, June 23, 1939, all secs.

[173] 55 Stat. 43, March 17, 1941.

[174] 56 Stat. 314, June 5, 1942, Sec. 2.

[175] 60 Stat. 92, April 18, 1946, Sec. 2.

[176] 62 Stat. 274, May 5, 1948.

[177] 67 Stat. 178, July 17, 1953, Sec. 1.

[178] 62 Stat. 193, June 25, 1948.

[179] 66 Stat. 155, June 24, 1952.

[180] 64 Stat. 316, June 30, 1950, Sec. 1.


NEGATIVE INTEGRATION

[181] Proclamation No. 2525, 55 Stat. 1700, December 7, 1941; the
statutes are found at 1 Stat. 577, 40 Stat. 531, 50 U.S.C. 21, 22, 23,
24 (1951).

[182] 66 Stat. 26, March 20, 1952.

[183] 66 Stat. 138, June 18, 1952.

[184] Executive Order 9066, February 19, 1942.

[185] 64 Stat. 987, 1021, September 23, 1950, Sec. 103.

[186] 55 Stat. 252, 967, June 20, 1941.

[187] 56 Stat. 173, March 21, 1942.

[188] Proclamation No. 2655, 2662, 2685, 59 Stat.

[189] Title II of the Internal Security Act of 1950, 64 Stat. 987,
1006, September 23, 1950, Sec. 22.

[190] 54 Stat. 1137, 1150, October 14, 1940, Sec. 326.

[191] Any person who “within three months from the date upon which
such organization was so registered or so required to be registered,
renounces, withdraws from, and utterly abandons such membership or
affiliation, and who thereafter ceases entirely to be affiliated with
such organization, is exempted from this provision.” (Sec. 25).

[192] 58 Stat. 677, July 1, 1944.

[193] 58 Stat. 746, September 27, 1944.

[194] Proclamation No. 2497, 55 Stat. 1657, July 17, 1941, Sec. 1 (a),
(b), issued under authority of Sec. 5 (b) of the Act of October 6,
1917, 40 Stat. 415.

[195] _Id._

[196] 64 Stat. 987, 1013, September 23, 1950, Sec. 25.

[197] 68 Stat. 1146, September 3, 1954.

[198] 52 Stat. 3, January 12, 1938, all secs.

[199] 64 Stat. 825, September 9, 1950.

[200] 55 Stat. 1700, December 7, 1941.

[201] 49 Stat. 1081, May 27, 1935, Sec. 6.

[202] 50 Stat. 121, May 1, 1937.

[203] 54 Stat. 4, November 4, 1939.

[204] _Id._, Sec. 2 (a).

[205] Proclamation No. 2348, 54 Stat. 2629, September 5, 1939.

[206] 54 Stat. 80, March 28, 1940.

[207] 35 Stat. 1097, March 4, 1909.

[208] Proclamation No. 2532, 55 Stat. 1713, December 27, 1941.

[209] Proclamation No. 2536, 56 Stat. 1932, January 13, 1942.

[210] Proclamation No. 2540, 56 Stat. 1936, February 10, 1942.

[211] Proclamation No. 2543, 56 Stat. 1941, March 25, 1942; No. 2569,
56 Stat 1978, October 21, 1942; No. 2573, 56 Stat. 1985, November 17,
1942.

[212] 56 Stat. 173, May 21, 1942.

[213] Proclamation No. 2348, 54 Stat. 2629, September 5, 1939.

[214] Proclamation No. 2523, 55 Stat. 1696, November 14, 1941.

[215] 66 Stat. 163, June 27, 1952.

[216] 49 Stat. 1081, May 27, 1935.

[217] _Id._, Sec. 2. In return for the $500 fee one received a
registration certificate valid for five years and renewable. Exports
and imports were subject to licensing by the Board.

[218] 50 Stat. 121, May 1937. Registration fees reduced to $100 for
those whose annual sales were less than $50,000. Sec. 5 (c).

[219] 52 Stat 631, June 1938.

[220] _Id._, Sec. 2.

[221] _Id._, Secs. 3, 5.

[222] _Id._

[223] 54 Stat. 670, June 28, 1940.

[224] _Id._, Sec. 35.

[225] 56 Stat. 1933, January 14, 1942.

[226] 56 Stat. 248, April 29, 1942, Sec. 1.

[227] _Id._, Sec. 3.

[228] 54 Stat. 1201, October 17, 1940.

[229] _Id._, Sec. 2.

[230] _Id._, Sec. 1 (c).

[231] _Id._, Sec. 1 (d).

[232] 64 Stat. 987, September 23, 1950, Sec. 3.

[233] _Id._, Sec. 7.

[234] P. L. 557, 68 Stat. 586, July 29, 1954.

[235] _Id._, Secs. 13, 14.

[236] P. L. 637, 68 Stat. 586, August 24, 1954, Sec. 3.

[237] _Id._, Sec. 7.

[238] _Id._, Sec. 10.

[239] _Id._

[240] _Id._, Sec. 6.

[241] 50 Stat. 211, May 28, 1937.

[242] 54 Stat. 676, June 21, 1940, Sec. 11.

[243] 54 Stat. 885, September 16, 1940, Sec. 8 (i). Contrast the
relatively simple and clear-cut reference to the two groups with the
variety of “Communist organizations” defined in the Internal Security
and Communist Control Acts mentioned above.

[244] 55 Stat. 808, December 17, 1941, Secs. 1, 3.

[245] _Id._

[246] 67 Stat. 408, August 7, 1953, Sec. 7 (a).

[247] 57 Stat. 163, June 25, 1943, Sec. 8.

[248] _Id._, Sec. 3, 5. President Roosevelt, in the absence of enabling
legislation, had previously resorted to plant seizure in such cases.

[249] _Id._, Sec. 4.

[250] _Id._, Sec. 206.

[251] _Id._

[252] _Id._, Sec. 208.

[253] _Id._, Sec. 8 (d).

[254] 54 Stat. 712, July 2, 1940, Sec. 4.

[255] _Id._

[256] 55 Stat. 606, July 29, 1941, Sec. 2.

[257] _Id._

[258] 61 Stat. 551, July 30, 1947, Sec. 1.

[259] See 64 Stat. 595, September 6, 1950, Sec. 1209.

[260] 64 Stat. 798, September 8, 1950, Sec. 715.

[261] _Id._

[262] 64 Stat. 476, August 26, 1950.

[263] P. L. 600, 68 Stat. 745, August 20, 1954.

[264] 335 U.S. 1, 1948.


CHAPTER V


STOCKPILING

[265] 53 Stat. 811, June 7, 1939, Sec. 2-3, 7.

[266] 53 Stat. 1407, August 11, 1939.

[267] 54 Stat 265, 297, June 11, 1940.

[268] _Id._, and 54 Stat. 712, July 2, 1940, Sec. 5.

[269] 64 Stat. 798, September 8, 1950, Sec. 303.

[270] 66 Stat. 141, June 20, 1952, Sec. 514.

[271] 65 Stat. 131, July 31, 1951, Title I, Sec. 102.

[272] 67 Stat. 417, August 7, 1953, Sec. 2.

[273] _Id._

[274] _Id._, Sec. 3.


MILITARY SITES AND PRODUCTIVE FACILITIES

[275] 53 Stat. 1123, July 26, 1939.

[276] 63 Stat. 66, May 11, 1949, Secs. 1-2.

[277] 65 Stat. 404, October 11, 1951, Secs. 1, 3 (5).

[278] 56 Stat. 176, March 27, 1942, Title II, Sec. 201.

[279] _Id._

[280] 64 Stat. 1245, January 12, 1951, Title II, Sec. 201.

[281] 48 Stat. 58, May 18, 1933.

[282] _Id._, Sec. 3 (h).

[283] _Id._, Sec. 5.

[284] _Id._, Sec. 5 (1).

[285] _Id._, Sec. 20.

[286] 56 Stat. 126, March 5, 1942.

[287] 61 Stat. 24, March 29, 1947, Sec. 2.

[288] 62 Stat. 101, March 31, 1948, Secs. 2-3.

[289] 58 Stat. 190, April 5, 1944, Sec. 1.

[290] _Id._, Sec. 1.

[291] 64 Stat. 435, August 10, 1950, Sec. 2.

[292] _Id._, Sec. 3.

[293] 54 Stat. 396, June 15, 1940.

[294] 55 Stat. 31, March 11, 1941, Sec. 3 (a).

[295] 54 Stat. 1090, October 10, 1940, Sec. 1.

[296] 56 Stat. 467, July 2, 1942, Sec. 2.

[297] 54 Stat. 676, June 28, 1940, Sec. 8 (a).

[298] 55 Stat. 742, October 16, 1941, Sec. 1.

[299] 49 Stat. 1985, June 29, 1936, Sec. 902 (a).

[300] 55 Stat. 40, July 30, 1941, Secs. 3-4 (a). See also 53 Stat.
1254, August 7, 1939, Sec. 3.

[301] 55 Stat. 745, October 24, 1941, Sec. (b).

[302] 64 Stat. 798, September 8, 1950, Title II, Sec. 201 (a).

[303] 67 Stat. 177, July 17, 1953, Sec. 1.


FACILITATING ACQUISITION BY PRIVATE ENTERPRISES

[304] 55 Stat. 610, July 30, 1941, Sec. 3.

[305] _Id._, Secs. 2-3.

[306] Plantation Pipe Line System (Proclamation No. 2505, 55 Stat.
1670, August 23, 1941); Southeastern Pipe Line System (Proclamation
No. 2508, 55 Stat. 1672, September 3, 1941); Portland Pipe Line
(Proclamation No. 2517, 55 Stat. 1691, October 1, 1941); Project Five
Pipe Line (El Dorado to Helena, Arkansas, Proclamation No. 2567, 56
Stat. 1975, August 28, 1942); Pipe Line from Cushing, Oklahoma to
Heyworth, Illinois (Proclamation No. 2657, 59 Stat. 872, July 20, 1945).

[307] 56 Stat. 176, March 27, 1942, Title II, Sec. 201.

[308] 56 Stat. 351, June 11, 1942, Sec. 4 (a).

[309] _Id._, Sec. 4 (f).


AVAILABILITY OF FEDERALLY OWNED PROPERTY TO PRIVATE ENTERPRISE

[310] 52 Stat. 707, June 16, 1938, Sec. 2.

[311] 54 Stat. 265, 295, 297, June 11, 1940.

[312] 54 Stat. 712, July 2, 1940, Sec. 5 (2).

[313] 64 Stat. 798, September 8, 1950.


ACQUISITIONS INCIDENTAL TO ENFORCEMENT OF A CONTROL PROGRAM.

[314] 54 Stat. 676, June 28, 1940, Sec. 8 (b).

[315] 54 Stat. 885, September 16, 1940, Sec. 9.

[316] 57 Stat. 163, June 25, 1943, Sec. 3. This provision took the form
of an amendment to Sec. 9 of the Selective Training and Service Act of
1940, above.

[317] 56 Stat. 23, January 30, 1942, Sec. 2 (b).


CHAPTER VI


CONTROL OF GOODS AND MATERIALS.

[318] 48 Stat. 58, May 18, 1933, Sec. 5 (1).

[319] 48 Stat. 811, May 28, 1934.

[320] Proclamation No. 2087, 48 Stat. 1744, May 28, 1934.

[321] 49 Stat. 1081, August 31, 1935.

[322] _Id._

[323] _Id._

[324] 50 Stat. 3, January 8, 1937, Sec. 1.

[325] 50 Stat. 121, May 1, 1937, Sec. 1.

[326] Proclamation No. 2236, 50 Stat. 1831, May 1, 1937.

[327] Proclamation No. 2635. Subsequently, on November 4, the President
signed a revision of the Neutrality Act, in which emphasis was shifted
from export control to control of American shipping as the device for
maintaining neutrality. The shipping control provisions are discussed
later in this chapter.

[328] 54 Stat. 4, November 4, 1939, Sec. 2 (c).

[329] Proclamations No. 2376, 54 Stat. 2673, November 4, 1939; 2394, 54
Stat. 2693, April 10, 1940; 2474, 55 Stat. 1628, April 10, 1941.

[330] Proclamation No. 2348, 54 Stat. 2629, September 5, 1939.

[331] Proclamation No. 2413, 54 Stat. 2712, July 2, 1940, delegating
to an Administrator of Export Control his statutory power to prohibit
unlicensed export from the United States of basic materials and
products. The list included aluminum, antimony, asbestos, chromium,
cotton linters, flax, graphite, hides, industrial diamonds, manganese,
magnesium, manila fiber, mercury, mica, molybdenum, optical glass,
platinum group metals, quartz crystals, quinine, rubber, silk,
tin, tolnol, tungsten, vanadium and wool, in addition to specified
chemicals, products, and machine tools.

Proclamation No. 2417, 54 Stat. 2726, July 26, 1940, added petroleum
products, tetraethyl lead, and iron and steel scrap to the foregoing.

Proclamations No. 2423, 54 Stat. 2737, September 12, 1940; 2453, 55
Stat. 1607, January 10, 1941; 2428, 54 Stat. 2743, September 30, 1940;
2449, 54 Stat. 2768, December 10, 1940; 2451, 54 Stat. 2770, December
20, 1940; 2456, 55 Stat. 1610, February 4, 1941; 2460, 55 Stat. 1614,
February 25, 1941; 2461, 55 Stat. 1615, February 25, 1941; 2463, 55
Stat. 1617, March 4, 1941; 2464, 55 Stat. 1618, March 4, 1941; 2465, 55
Stat. 1619, March 4, 1941; 2468, 55 Stat. 1622, March 27, 1941; 2475,
55 Stat. 1629, April 14, 1941; 2476, 55 Stat. 1630, April 4, 1941;
2482, 55 Stat. 1639, May 10, 1941; 2497, 55 Stat. 1657, July 17, 1941,
considerably extended the list of materials and products which might
not be exported without license.

All of the foregoing Proclamations were issued under the Act to
expedite the strengthening of the national defense of the United States.

[332] _Id._

[333] 56 Stat. 463, June 30, 1942, Sec. 6 (a).

[334] _Id._, Sec. 6 (b).

[335] 63 Stat.

[336] _Id._, Sec. 2.

[337] 65 Stat. 692, October 30, 1951.

[338] 55 Stat. 810, December 17, 1941.

[339] 63 Stat. 7, 1949, Sec. 3 (a).

[340] _Id._, Sec. 2 (a).

[341] 49 Stat. 30, February 22, 1935, Secs. 1, 3.

[342] 56 Stat. 176, March 27, 1942.

[343] _Id._

[344] 55 Stat. 236, May 31, 1941.

[345] 56 Stat. 176, March 27, 1942.

[346] 61 Stat. 24, March 29, 1947.

[347] 62 Stat. 101, March 31, 1948.

[348] 61 Stat. 34, March 31, 1947, Sec. 1501.

[349] 64 Stat. 798, September 8, 1950, Sec. 101.

[350] _Id._, Sec. 102.

[351] 65 Stat. 692, October 30, 1951, Sec. 1.


CONTROL OF PRODUCTIVE FACILITIES.

[352] --

[353] 55 Stat. 236, May 31, 1941.

[354] 55 Stat. 148, May 2, 1941, Sec. 2 (a).

[355] 56 Stat. 176, March 27, 1942, Sec. 301.

[356] 59 Stat. 231, June 5, 1945, Sec. 3.

[357] 64 Stat. 798, September 8, 1950, Sec. 101.

[358] 54 Stat. 710, July 1, 1940; 56 Stat. 1013, October 31, 1942; 66
Stat. 3, February 1, 1952.

[359] 54 Stat. 885, September 16, 1940, Sec. 9.

[360] _Id._

[361] 56 Stat. 176, March 27, 1942, Sec. 301, amending Sec. 2 (a) of 54
Stat. 676, June 28, 1940.

[362] 64 Stat. 798, September 8, 1950, Sec. 101; 67 Stat. 129, June 30,
1953, Sec. 101.

[363] 54 Stat. 1220, November 30, 1940.

[364] _Id._

[365] 48 Stat. 195, June 16, 1933.

[366] _Id._, Title II, Sec. 206.

[367] 48 Stat. 1183, June 19, 1934.

[368] 295 U.S. 495 (1935).

[369] 57 Stat. 163, June 25, 1943.

[370] _Id._, Secs. 3, 6.

[371] 61 Stat. 136, June 23, 1947, Secs. 206, 208.

[372] 48 Stat. 503, March 27, 1934, Sec. 3.

[373] 52 Stat. 1252, June 30, 1938, Sec. 1.

[374] 54 Stat. 676, Secs. 2 (a), 9, June 28, 1940.

[375] 56 Stat. 176, March 27, 1942, Sec. 301, amending 54 Stat. 676,
June 28, 1940.

[376] _Id._, Sec. 301.

[377] _Id._

[378] 56 Stat. 226, April 28, 1942, Sec. 401.

[379] _Id._, Sec. 403 (b).

[380] 65 Stat. 7, March 23, 1951, Sec. 101.


CONTROL OF CREDIT, EXCHANGE, PRICES.

[381] 64 Stat. 798, September 8, 1950, Sec. 2.

[382] Executive Order No. 8843, August 9, 1941; Fed. Reg. 6:4035.

[383] 64 Stat. 798, September 8, 1950, Sec. 601.

[384] _Id._, Sec. 602.

[385] 55 Stat. 610, July 30, 1941, Sec. 6.

[386] 55 Stat. 745, October 24, 1941, Sec. (c).

[387] 48 Stat. 881, June 6, 1934, Sec. 2.

[388] 50 Stat. 121, May 1, 1937, Sec. 3 (c).

[389] 55 Stat. 838, December 18, 1941, Sec. 301.

[390] 63 Stat. 7, February 26, 1949, Sec. 2.

[391] 56 Stat. 23, January 20, 1942, Sec. 2 (a).

[392] 56 Stat. 765, October 2, 1942, Sec. 2 (d).

[393] _Id._, Sec. 5 (c).

[394] 60 Stat. 664, July 25, 1946, Sec. 3.

[395] 61 Stat. 35, March 31, 1947, Sec. 1.

[396] 64 Stat. 798, September 8, 1950, Sec. 402 (b).


CONTROL OF COMMON CARRIERS.

[397] 48 Stat. 211, June 16, 1933, Secs. 2-3.

[398] _Id._, Secs. 3-6.

[399] _Id._, Sec. 5.

[400] _Id._, Sec. 7 (a) (b).

[401] _Id._, Sec. 7 (c).

[402] 44 Stat. 577, May 20, 1926, Sec. 2; 48 Stat. 1185, June 21, 1934,
Secs. 2-5.

[403] 48 Stat. 933, June 12, 1934, Sec. 20.

[404] 52 Stat. 973, June 23, 1938.

[405] 64 Stat. 825, September 9, 1950, Sec. 1.

[406] 48 Stat. 1064, June 19, 1934, Secs. 1-2.

[407] _Id._, Sec. 606 (b).

[408] _Id._

[409] 55 Stat. 610, July 30, 1941, Sec. 8 (a).

[410] _Id._, Sec. 101 (e).

[411] 67 Stat. 115, June 30, 1953.

[412] 49 Stat. 1081, August 31, 1935, Sec. 3.

[413] _Id._

[414] _Id._, Sec. 4.

[415] 50 Stat. 3, January 18, 1937.

[416] 50 Stat. 121, May 1, 1937, Secs. 2 (a), 6-7.

[417] Proclamation No. 2236, 50 Stat. 1831, May 1, 1937.

[418] 54 Stat. 4, November 4, 1939, Sec. 2 (c).

[419] _Id._, Sec. 2 (a). Emphasis supplied. Note that the effect was
to loosen the earlier prohibition upon export of arms to belligerents
while simultaneously it more strictly circumscribed the movements of
American vessels.

[420] 54 Stat. 866, August 27, 1940.

[421] Illegal Exportation of War Materials Act, 67 Stat. 577, August
13, 1953, Sec. 1.

[422] 49 Stat. 1985, June 29, 1936, Secs. 210, 902 (a).

[423] _Id._, Sec. 610.

[424] _Id._, Sec. 506.

[425] 55 Stat. 59, July 14, 1941, Secs. 1, 34.

[426] 55 Stat. 808, December 17, 1941.

[427] 57 Stat. 161, June 22, 1943.

[428] 50 Stat. 121, June 22, 1943, Sec. 8.

[429] 54 Stat. 2668.

[430] 54 Stat. 4, November 4, 1939, Sec. 11.

[431] Proclamation No. 2375, 54 Stat. 2672, November 4, 1939.


CHAPTER VII


GOVERNMENT AS A SOURCE OF INFORMATION

[432] See e.g., the collection of essays edited by Harry Elmer Barnes,
_Perpetual War For Perpetual Peace_ (Caldwell, Idaho: 1952, Caxton
Press). In his brilliant history of American naval operations during
the Second World War, Professor Samuel Eliot Morison leaves little
doubt that President Roosevelt recognized the eventual need to come to
military grips with Nazi aggression: “President Roosevelt, considerably
in advance of public opinion, apprehended the threat to American
security contained in the seizure of the Atlantic Coast of France,
and the strong possibility of a German invasion of Great Britain.”
Samuel Eliot Morison, _The Battle of the Atlantic_, 1939-1943, (Boston:
Little, Brown and Company, 1947) p. 27. Chapter III, “‘Short of War’
Policy” dramatically describes the efforts of the Administration during
the critical months of June 1940-March 1941 to sustain Great Britain by
any means at our disposal that did not involve an outright declaration
of war by the Germans. In Professor Morison’s estimation, Roosevelt
guessed right; Hitler could not afford to bring the United States into
the war in 1940 or 1941 despite the trade of destroyers for bases with
Britain, Lend-Lease, and American aid to British convoys. _Id._, p. 36.

[433] In this regard a group of distinguished American historians wrote
to the _New York Times_ as follows:

“On May 7 President Eisenhower issued Executive Order 10816 amending an
earlier order regarding the treatment of official documents. This order
was generally treated in the press as a liberalization of existing
procedures, and we have no doubt that this was the intention of its
promulgators.

“However, in our view, the order proceeds in the wrong direction.
We fear that its consequence will be not to liberate the historian
for the writing of independent history but to entangle him in a
series of potentially compromising relations with the subject of his
researches--in this case, the Government.

“The new Executive Order lays down three prerequisites before a student
is permitted to consult classified defense information in the writing
of history.

“First, the head of the agency must rule that access to these records
is ‘clearly consistent with the interests of national defense.’ Second,
the historian himself must be determined to be ‘trustworthy’--a phrase
which could be interpreted as requiring security clearance. Third, his
manuscript must be cleared.

“The enforcement of these three prerequisites will plainly make it
difficult for the most undaunted of historians to exercise the free
and unfettered critical judgment which is the heart of the historical
enterprise. And, under prejudiced or incompetent administration, this
Executive Order could easily result in the restriction of such official
records to those historians prepared to accept and defend official
views.” (_New York Times_, October 25, 1959.)

[434] 48 Stat. 58, May 18, 1933.

[435] 64 Stat. 798, September 8, 1950, Sec. 102.

[436] 54 Stat. 714, July 2, 1940, Sec. 5 (a).

[437] Proclamation No. 2497, 55 Stat. 1657, July 17, 1941.

[438] 52 Stat. 631, June 8, 1938, Sec. 4.

[439] 61 Stat. 136, June 23, 1947, Sec. 208.

[440] _Id._

[441] 62 Stat. 21, February 19, 1948, Sec. 2 (b) (c).

[442] 67 Stat. 230, July 30, 1953, Sec. 207 (e).

[443] 64 Stat. 1245, January 12, 1951, Sec. 201 (f).

[444] 65 Stat. 293, September 1, 1951, Sec. 3 (a).

[445] 67 Stat. 417, August 7, 1953, Sec. 4.

[446] 48 Stat. 1, March 9, 1933, Sec. 203.

[447] The trend is discussed at length in the section on the
“Legislative Veto,” below.

[448] 54 Stat. 670, June 28, 1940, Sec. 20.

[449] _Id._

[450] 48 Stat. 943, June 12, 1934, Sec. 4.

[451] 56 Stat. 23, January 30, 1942, Sec. 2 (a).

[452] 48 Stat. 211, June 16, 1933, Sec. 8.

[453] _Id._

[454] _Id._, Sec. 9.


SUPPRESSION OF INFORMATION BY THE GOVERNMENT.

[455] 56 Stat. 351, June 11, 1942, Sec. 12. See the similar provision
in the R.F.C. Liquidation Act, 67 Stat. 230, July 30, 1953, Sec. 217
(b).

[456] 62 Stat. 1231, July 2, 1948, Sec. 3 (c).

[457] 67 Stat. 23, April 1953, Sec. 5.

[458] 48 Stat. 1064, June 19, 1934, Sec. 4 (f).

[459] 55 Stat. 31, March 11, 1941, Sec. 5 (a).

[460] 56 Stat. 19, January 26, 1942.

[461] 65 Stat. 373, October 10, 1951, Section 518.

[462] 58 Stat. 723, July 3, 1944.

[463] _Id._

[464] 49 Stat. 1277, May 15, 1936.

[465] 53 Stat. 1000, July 13, 1939.

[466] _Id._

[467] 54 Stat. 676, June 28, 1940, Sec. 2 (a).

[468] 54 Stat. 712, July 2, 1940, Sec. 5.

[469] James Phinney Baxter 3rd, _Scientists Against Time_ (Boston:
Little, Brown and Company, 1946), Ch. I.

[470] 55 Stat. 838, December 18, 1941, Sec. 201.

[471] 61 Stat. 585, July 30, 1947.

[472] _Id._

[473] 63 Stat. 208, June 20, 1949, Sec. 7.

[474] Cf. Sec. 19 of the T.V.A. Act, 48 Stat. 58, May 18, 1933,
discussed above.

[475] 54 Stat. 710, July 1, 1940, Sec. 1.

[476] 66 Stat. 3, February 1, 1952.

[477] 56 Stat. 23, January 30, 1942, Sec. 202 (h).

[478] 63 Stat. 1949, February 26, 1949, Sec. 6.


REGULATION OF PROPAGANDA ACTIVITIES.

[479] 52 Stat. 631, June 8, 1938: quotation from 1942 amendment, 56
Stat. 248, April 29, 1942.

[480] _Id._, Sec. 3.

[481] _Id._, Sec. 4 (a).

[482] _Id._, Sec. 4 (b).

[483] Sec. 10, September 22, 1950.


CENSORSHIP AND OTHER RESTRICTIONS.

[484] 52 Stat. 3, January 12, 1938, Sec. 1.

[485] _Id._, Sec. 3.

[486] 54 Stat. 670, June 28, 1940, Sec. 1. (a).

[487] _Id._, Sec. 2 (a), 18 U.S.C. 2385.

[488] _Id._, Sec. 3.

[489] 63 Stat. 7, February 26, 1949, Sec. 3 (a).

[490] 67 Stat. 363, August 5, 1953, Sec. 4 (b).

[491] 65 Stat. 710, 719 ff, October 31, 1951, Sec. 24; 18 U.S.C. 798.

[492] _Id._

[493] Public Law 557, 83d Congress, 2d Session, July 29, 1954; amending
section 7 (d) of the Internal Security Act of 1950.

[494] _Id._, the list to include, but not limited to rotary presses,
flatbed cylinder presses, platen presses, lithographs, offsets,
photo-offsets, mimeograph machines, multigraph machines, multilith
machines, type machines, monotype machines, and all other types of
printing presses, typesetting machines or any mechanical devices used
or intended to be used, or capable of being used to produce or publish
printed matter or material, which are in the possession, custody,
ownership, or control of the organization or its officers, members,
affiliates, associates, group, or groups in which the organization, its
officers or members have an interest.

[495] 55 Stat. 838, December 18, 1941, Sec. 303.

[496] 56 Stat. 18, January 26, 1942, Sec. 1.

[497] 65 Stat. 611, October 24, 1951, Sec. 1.

[498] _Id._


ACQUISITION OF INFORMATION BY THE GOVERNMENT.

[499] The earlier discussion of compulsory testimony should be
incorporated by reference into this section, for sake of completeness.

[500] 48 Stat. 1, March 9, 1933, Sec. 2.

[501] _Id._

[502] 48 Stat. 195, June 16, 1933, Sec. 3 (a).

[503] _Id._, Sec. 6 (a).

[504] 48 Stat. 881, June 6, 1934, Sec. 4.

[505] 49 Stat. 30, February 22, 1935, Sec. 5 (a).

[506] 49 Stat. 1081, August 31, 1935, Sec. 2.

[507] 50 Stat. 121, May 1, 1937, Sec. 4 (e).

[508] 52 Stat. 631, June 8, 1938, as amended by 56 Stat. 248, April 29,
1942, Sec. 5.

[509] 48 Stat. 503, March 27, 1934, Sec. (a).

[510] 56 Stat. 176, March 27, 1942, Sec. 301.

[511] 48 Stat. 58, May 18, 1933, Sec. 5 (h).

[512] 52 Stat. 401, May 17, 1938, Sec. 6.

[513] 52 Stat 1255, June 30, 1938.

[514] 64 Stat. 149, May 10, 1950, Sec. 2.

[515] _Id._, Sec. 3 (a).

[516] 66 Stat. 153, June 23, 1952, Sec. 1.

[517] 67 Stat. 559, August 13, 1953, Sec. 2.

[518] _Id._, Sec. 1.

[519] 48 Stat. 8, March 20, 1933, Title II, Sec. 3 (a).

[520] 48 Stat. 1183, June 19, 1934, Sec. 1.

[521] 56 Stat. 176, March 27, 1942, Sec. 1401.

[522] _Id._, Sec. 7307.

[523] 58 Stat. 723, July 3, 1944, Sec. 4.

[524] 60 Stat. 23, February 20, 1946.

[525] 62 Stat. 93, March 30, 1948, Sec. 202.

[526] 64 Stat. 1245, January 12, 1951, Sec. 201 (a).

[527] 48 Stat. 591, April 14, 1934, Sec. 1.

[528] _Id._, Sec. 2.

[529] _Id._, Sec. 1.

[530] 48 Stat. 933, June 12, 1934, Sec. 20.

[531] 48 Stat. 1283, June 27, 1934, Sec. 2 (b).

[532] 58 Stat. 1120, December 15, 1944, Sec. 2.

[533] Civil Rights Act of 1957, Public Law 85-315, 85th Cong., Sept. 9,
1957.

[534] _Id._, Sec. 104 (a) (1)-(3).

[535] _Report of the United States Commission on Civil Rights_
(Washington: Gov’t Printing Office, 1959).

[536] House Concurrent Resolution No. 24, August 21, 1937, 50 Stat.
1113.

[537] 53 Stat. 811, June 7, 1939, Sec. 7 (a).

[538] 61 Stat. 24, March 29, 1947, Sec. 1 (c).

[539] 67 Stat. 408, August 7, 1953, Sec. 4.

[540] _Id._, Sec. 9 (a) (6).

[541] 64 Stat. 435, August 10, 1950, Sec. 3 (b).

[542] 52 Stat. 436, May 23, 1938, Secs. 1, 2.

[543] _Id._

[544] 56 Stat. 351, June 11, 1942.

[545] _Id._, Sec. 2.

[546] 67 Stat. 230, July 30, 1953, Sec. 212 (b).

[547] _Id._, Sec. 210 (a).

[548] _Id._, Sec. 212 (f) (g).

[549] _Id._, Sec. 219.

[550] 58 Stat. 276, June 13, 1944, Sec. 1.

[551] 59 Stat. 845, September 11, 1945, Sec. 2.

[552] 61 Stat. 495, July 26, 1947, Sec. 102 (d) (3).


PROTECTING FREEDOM OF COMMUNICATION.

[553] Emergency Price Control Act of 1942, 56 Stat. 23, 34, January 30,
1942, Sec. 205 (f).

[554] 65 Stat. 75, June 19, 1951, Sec. 1 (d).


CHAPTER VIII


ACCOUNTING TO COMMITTEES

[555] David M. Levitan, “Responsibility of Administrative Officials
in a Democratic Society,” 61 _Political Science Quarterly_ (December
1946), 562-98.

[556] See John A. Perkins, “Congressional Self-Improvement,” 38 APSR
(June 1944), 499-511; Joint Committee on the Organization of Congress,
_Hearings_, 79th Congress, First Session (1945).

[557] See Estes Kefauver’s plea for a congressional question period in
“The Need for Better Executive-Legislative Teamwork in the National
Government,” 38 APSR (April 1944), 317-25.

[558] See Leonard D. White, “Congressional Control of the Public
Service,” 39 _American Political Science Review_, (February 1945), 1-11.

[559] Kefauver, _op. cit._ See Harry A. Toulmin, Jr., _Diary of
Democracy_ (New York, 1947), the story of the wartime Truman
Committee, for examples of such cooperation.


ACCOUNTING TO CONGRESS.

[560] _New York Times_, July 14, 1955, pp. 1, 8.

[561] 62 Stat. 258, May 21, 1948, Sec. 2.

[562] 63 Stat. 714, 720, October 6, 1949, Sec. 408 (c).

[563] _Id._

[564] 65 Stat. 373, October 10, 1951.

[565] 64 Stat. 10, February 25, 1950, Sec. 2.

[566] 64 Stat. 476, August 26, 1950, Sec. 3.

[567] 65 Stat. 644, October 26, 1951, Secs. 101, 103 (a).

[568] _Id._, Sec. 103 (b).

[569] 67 Stat. 363, August 5, 1953.

[570] _Id._, Sec. 4 (b).

[571] 66 Stat. 318, July 1, 1952, Sec. 2.

[572] _Id._, Secs. 9, 10.

[573] 67 Stat. 177, July 17, 1953, Sec. 2.

[574] _Constitutional Government and Politics_ (New York: Harper,
1937), p. 16. Also see Herbert A. Simon’s analysis in _Administrative
Behavior_ (New York: Macmillan, 1954), p. 129f.

[575] 62 Stat. 137, April 3, 1948, Sec. 124 (a).

[576] 64 Stat. 829, September 11, 1950, Sec. 3.

[577] 64 Stat. 798, September 8, 1950, Sec. 712 (b).

[578] 66 Stat. 163, June 27, 1952, Sec. 401 (a).

[579] _Id._, Sec. 401 (f).

[580] See J. Leiper Freeman, _The Political Process: Executive
Bureau-Legislative Committee Relations_, (Garden City: Doubleday, 1955).

[581] 65 Stat. 692, October 30, 1951, Sec. 10 (a).

[582] 63 Stat. 66, May 11, 1949, Sec. 2.

[583] 65 Stat. 365, September 28, 1951, Sec. 601.

[584] 66 Stat. 330, 334, July 3, 1952, Sec. 4.

[585] 52 Stat. 1249, June 29, 1938.

[586] 62 Stat. 1231, July 2, 1948, Sec. 4 (c).

[587] 49 Stat. 482, July 18, 1935.

[588] 50 Stat. 120, April 27, 1937.

[589] 54 Stat. 265, 297, June 11, 1940.

[590] 48 Stat. 55, May 2, 1933, Sec. 3 (d).

[591] 56 Stat. 351, 357, June 11, 1942, Sec. 12.

[592] An Act: To expedite national defense, 54 Stat. 676, June 28,
1940. An Act: Further to promote the defense of the United States,
55 Stat. 31, March 11, 1941. An Act: To make emergency provision for
certain activities of the United States Maritime Commission, 55 Stat.
148, May 2, 1941. Emergency Price Control Act of 1942, 56 Stat. 23,
January 30, 1942. Contract Settlement Act of 1944, 58 Stat. 649, July
1, 1944. Export Control of 1949, 63 Stat. 7, February 26, 1949. Army
Organization Act of 1949, 64 Stat. 1245, January 12, 1951, Sec. 303
(f) (“... the Federal Civil Defense Administrator to report quarterly
during the period of any such emergency.”).

[593] An Act: To authorize the President to requisition property
required for the defense of the United States, 55 Stat. 742, October
16, 1941. Atomic Energy Act of 1946, 60 Stat. 755, August 1, 1946.
Mutual Defense Assistance Act of 1949, 63 Stat. 714, October 6, 1949.
Mutual Security Act of 1951, 65 Stat. 373, October 10, 1951. An Act: To
liquidate the Reconstruction Finance Corporation and to establish the
Small Business Administration, 67 Stat. 230, July 30, 1953.

[594] 64 Stat. 438, August 11, 1950, Sec. 6, authorizing the
Commissioners of the District of Columbia to establish an office of
Civil Defense.

[595] Merchant Marine Act, 1936, 49 Stat. 1985, June 29, 1936, Sec. 208.

[596] Securities Exchange Act of 1934, 48 Stat. 881, June 6, 1934, Sec.
4. National Housing Act, 48 Stat. 1246, June 27, 1934, Title I, Sec. 5
(“... and annual report to the congress as soon as practicable after
the 1st day of January in each year ...”). Neutrality Act of 1935, 49
Stat. 1081, August 31, 1935, Sec. 2. 1937. Amendment to Neutrality Act
of 1935, 50 Stat. 121, May 1, 1937, Sec. 4 (j). An Act: Authorizing the
conservation, production, exploitation, and sale of helium gas ...,
500 Stat. 885, September 1, 1937. A 1938 Act concerning the leasing
of naval petroleum reserves, 52 Stat. 1252, June 30, 1938. An Act:
To facilitate certain construction work for the Army, 53 Stat. 1239,
August 7, 1939. Second War Powers Act, 1942, 56 Stat. 176, March 27,
1942, Title XI, Acceptance of conditional gifts to further the war
program, Sec. 1105. Sixth Supplemental National Defense Appropriation
Act, 1942, 56 Stat. 226, April 28, 1942, Sec. 2 (“... within sixty
days after the end of each fiscal year ...”). Amend. to Foreign
Agents Registration Act of 1938, 56 Stat. 248, April 29, 1942, Sec.
11. Federal Airport Act, 60 Stat. 170, May 13, 1946. Act increasing
membership of National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, 62 Stat.
266, May 25, 1948. Foreign Economic Assistance Act of 1950, 64 Stat.
198, June 5, 1950, Sec. 415. An Act ... providing for continuation and
expansion of Western Hemisphere production of abaca ..., 64 Stat. 435,
August 10, 1950, Sec. 7 (“... Within six months after the close of each
fiscal year ...”). Amend. to Merchant Marine Act, 1936, 64 Stat. 773,
September 7, 1950, Sec. 1211.

[597] 64 Stat. 263, June 28, 1950, Sec. 201 (c).

[598] 50 Stat. 121, May 1, 1937, Sec. 4 (j).

[599] 50 Stat. 885, September 1, 1937.

[600] _Id._, Sec. 4.

[601] 52 Stat. 1252, 1253, June 30, 1938, Sec. 1.

[602] 53 Stat. 1239, August 7, 1939, Sec. 1 (d).

[603] 56 Stat. 226, 244, April 28, 1942, Sec. 401.

[604] 48 Stat. 591, April 14, 1934, Sec. 1.

[605] 48 Stat. 58, May 18, 1933.

[606] _Id._, Sec. 23.

[607] 48 Stat. 933, June 12, 1934, Sec. 20.

[608] 48 Stat. 1064, June 19, 1934, Title I, Sec. 4 (k).

[609] 60 Stat. 664, July 25, 1946, Sec. 1A (b) (c).

[610] 61 Stat. 136, June 23, 1947, Sec. 210.

[611] 65 Stat. 75, June 19, 1951, Sec. 4 (k).


THE CONCURRENT RESOLUTION.

[612] Estes Kefauver, “The Challenge to Congress,” 6 Fed. Bar J.,
325-32, (April 1945).

[613] Bertram M. Gross, _The Legislative Struggle_ (New York, 1953).

[614] Art. I, Sec. 7. See Howard White, “Executive Responsibility to
Congress via Concurrent Resolution,” 36 _American Political Science
Review_ (October 1942), 895-900.

[615] White, _op. cit._

[616] Emergency Price Control Act of 1942, 56 Stat. 23, January 30,
1942, Sec. 1 (b).

[617] An Act: Further to promote the defense of the United States, 55
Stat. 31, March 11, 1941, Sec. 3.

Second War Powers Act, 56 Stat. 176, March 27, 1942, Sec. 1501.

An Act: To mobilize small business concerns for war production, 56
Stat. 351, June 11, 1942, Sec. 12.

An Act: To further expedite the prosecution of the war by authorizing
the control of the exportation of certain commodities, 56 Stat. 463,
June 30, 1942, Sec. 6 (d).

An Act: To amend the Act which permits the President to requisition
certain articles for national defense, 56 Stat. 467, July 2, 1942, Sec.
2.

An Act: To amend the Act authorizing vessels of Canadian registry to
transport iron ore on the Great Lakes during 1942, 56 Stat. 735, August
1, 1942.

An Act: To suspend temporarily the running of statutes of limitations
applicable to certain offenses, 56 Stat. 747, August 24, 1942.

An Act: To amend ... the Communications Act of 1934, 57 Stat. 161, June
27, 1943.

The War Labor Disputes Act, 57 Stat. 163, June 25, 1943, Sec. 10.

An Act: To extend the Selective Training and Service Act of 1940, 59
Stat. 166, May 9, 1945, Sec. 1.

First Decontrol Act of 1947, 61 Stat. 34, March 31, 1947, Sec. 1501.

Export Control Act of 1949, 63 Stat. 7, February 26, 1949, Sec. 12.

Mutual Defense Assistance Act of 1949, 63 Stat. 714, October 6, 1949,
Sec. 405 (d).

Foreign Economic Assistance Act of 1950, 64 Stat. 198, June 5, 1950,
Sec. 409 (b).

The Defense Production Act of 1950, 64 Stat. 798, September 8, 1950,
Sec. 17, 716.

An Act: To amend the Civil Aeronautics Act of 1938, 64 Stat. 825,
September 9, 1950, Sec. 1205.

Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950, 64 Stat. 1245, January 12, 1951,
Sec. 307.

Amendment to the First War Powers Act, 1941, 64 Stat. 1257, January 12,
1951, Sec. 12.

Mutual Security Act of 1951, 65 Stat. 373, October 10, 1951, Sec. 530.

67 Stat. 133, June 30, 1953, Sec. 2157.

An Act: To provide certain construction and other authorization for the
military departments in time of war or national emergency, 67 Stat.
177, July 17, 1953, Sec. 1.

Military traffic continuance Act, 67 Stat. 244, July 31, 1953.

[618] _Op. cit._, Sec. 405 (d).

[619] 55 Stat. 616, August 11, 1941, Sec. 1. See also the Act of June
30, 1953, 67 Stat. 115, continuing certain emergency statutes in effect
“until six months after the termination of the national emergency
proclaimed by the President on December 16, 1950 ... or until such
earlier date as the Congress by concurrent resolution declares that it
is no longer necessary to exercise the powers continued in force and
effect by this act.”

[620] 56 Stat. 18, January 26, 1942.

[621] 64 Stat. 1245, January 12, 1951, Sec. 301.

[622] E.g., amendment to the Military Personnel Claims Act of 1945, 67
Stat. 317, August 1, 1953. As is usual, the President might establish
such dates by proclamation.

[623] 54 Stat. 4, November 4, 1939, Sec. 1 (a).

[624] 53 Stat. 561, April 3, 1939, Sec. 5; 59 Stat. 613, December 20,
1945, Sec. 6 (a), and 63 Stat. 203, June 20, 1949, Sec. 6.

[625] _Op. cit._, Sec. 2 (a).

[626] 60 Stat. 1329. See also 62 Stat. 1428, March 16, 1948, (H.
Concurrent Resolution disapproving Reorganization Plan No. 1 of January
19, 1948).

[627] Despite this provision, the Congress chose to approve
Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1953 by joint resolution, in order that it
might in the course of approving it, also amend it. 67 Stat. 18, April
1, 1953.

[628] 64 Stat. 1245, January 12, 1951, Sec. 201 (g).

[629] 54 Stat. 670, June 28, 1940, Sec. 20.

[630] Concurrent Resolution: Granting of Permanent Residence to Certain
Aliens. 65 Stat. B16, April 11, 1951, H. Con. Res. 49.

[631] Concurrent Resolution: Deportation Suspensions. 65 Stat. B3,
March 6, 1951, S. Con. Res. 7.

Concurrent Resolution: Deportation Suspensions. 65 Stat. B13, March 12,
1951, S. Con. Res. 6.

Concurrent Resolution: Deportation Suspensions. 65 Stat. B18, April 17,
1951, S. Con. Res. 13.

Concurrent Resolution: Deportation Suspensions. 66 Stat. B4, April 1,
1952, S. Con. Res. 58 (over 600).

Concurrent Resolution: Deportation Suspension. 66 Stat. B17, April 9,
1952, S. Con. Res. 63 (over 400).

Concurrent Resolution: Deportation Suspension. 66 Stat. B26, May 20,
1952, S. Con. Res. 67 (over 450).

Concurrent Resolution: Deportation Suspensions. 66 Stat. B40, May 27,
1952, S. Con. Res. 66 (over 250).

Concurrent Resolution: Deportation Suspension. 66 Stat. B36, May 20,
1952, S. Con. Res. 68 (over 200).

Concurrent Resolution: Deportation Suspension. 66 Stat. B65, July 3,
1952, S. Con. Res. 72 (over 300).

Concurrent Resolution: Deportation Suspension. 66 Stat. B72, July 3,
1952, S. Con. Res. 76 (over 400).

Concurrent Resolution: Deportation Suspension. 66 Stat. B81, July 4,
1952, S. Con. Res. 81 (over 600).

Concurrent Resolutions, 1953. The 83rd Congress first session, by
concurrent resolution provided for the permanent residence of over 900
aliens in the U.S. and suspended the deportation of over 6,200 aliens.
67 Stat. B5ff.

[632] 67 Stat. 408, August 7, 1953, Sec. 3, 9.

[633] Amendments to the Universal Military Training and Service Act, 65
Stat. 75, June 19, 1951, Sec. 4.

[634] 56 Stat. 9 (1942).

[635] H. Con. Res. 9 and 10 (1943); H. Con. Res. 81, 93 (1944); S. Con.
Res. 9, 18 and H. Con. Res. 1, 2, 6, 15, 20, 24, 26, 56, 59, 70, 73,
74, 76, 77, 78, 79, 82 (1945).

[636] H. Con. Res. 51 (1951).

[637] 55 Stat. 31, 32 Sec. 3(c) (1941).

[638] 56 Stat. 176, 187 (1942). “Titles I to IX, inclusive, and titles
XI and XIV of this Act, and the amendments to existing law made by any
such title, shall remain in force only until December 31, 1944, or
until such earlier time as the Congress by concurrent resolution, or
the President, may designate....”

[639] H. Con. Res. 21 (1947).

[640] H. Con. Res. 138 (1946), providing for termination of an Act of
July 14, 1941, providing for priority in transportation by merchant
vessels for national defense purposes. 55 Stat. 591 (1941).

[641] H. Con. Res. 85, 86, 91, 98 (1945); H. Con. Res. 132, 133, 156
(1946); H. Con. Res. 5, 9, 25 (1947).

[642] S. Con. Res. 31, H. Con. Res. 81 (1945).

[643] 91 _Cong. Rec._ 9099, 9217; 59 Stat. 846 (1945).

[644] 54 Stat. 4 (1939).

[645] _Ibid._, Sec. 1 (a).

[646] The words are those of Senator Gillette at 76 _Cong. Rec._ 355
(1940).

[647] S. Con. Res. 35 (1940).

[648] S. Con. Res. 36, and H. Con Res. 44 (1940).

[649] H. Con. Res. 44 (1941).

[650] 92 _Cong. Rec._ 7911, 8994; 60 Stat. Pt. 2 (1946).

[651] 93 _Cong. Rec._ 6722, 7857; 60 Stat. Pt. 2, 1023 (1947).

[652] H. on C. Res. 131, 80 _Cong. Rec._ 1721, 2921; 62 Stat. Pt. 2,
1428 (1948).

[653] 63 Stat. 203, 205 (1949).

[654] 95 _Cong. Rec._ 11561 (1949).

[655] S. Con. Res. 42 and H. Con. Res. 61 (1940); H. Con. Res. 50
(1947).

[656] H. Con. Res. 151, 154 (1946); H. Con. Res. 5 (1947).

[657] S. Con. Res. 16, H. Con. Res. 19 (1939); S. Con. Res. 43 (1940);
S. Con. Res. 66 (1946).

[658] H. Con. Res. 60 (1940).


CHAPTER IX


COMMUNICATION

[659] Chapter IX, on “The Problem of Interest Groups,” in Emmett S.
Redford’s notable study, _Administration of National Economic Control_
(New York: Macmillan, 1952), is one of the most complete and valuable
reviews of literature on the role of groups in federal regulatory
programs.

[660] Herbert A. Simon, _Administrative Behavior_ (New York: Macmillan,
1954), p. 154.

[661] 56 Stat. 248, April 29, 1942, Sec. 4 (d).

[662] 52 Stat. 1175, June 25, 1938, Sec. 316.

[663] _The American College Dictionary._

[664] 48 Stat. 211, June 16, 1933, Sec. 6 (a).

[665] 64 Stat. 798, September 8, 1950, Sec. 404.

[666] 60 Stat. 798, May 13, 1946, Sec. 3 (a).

[667] 60 Stat. 128, April 30, 1946, Sec. 10 (a), 102 (a).

[668] 48 Stat. 943, June 12, 1934, Sec. 4.

[669] 48 Stat. 811, May 28, 1934.

[670] 55 Stat. 31, March 11, 1941, Sec. 3 (a).

[671] 64 Stat. 773, September 7, 1950, Sec. 1202 (a).

[672] 64 Stat. 825, September 9, 1950, Sec. 1203.

[673] 55 Stat. 606, July 29, 1941, Sec. 2.

[674] 61 Stat. 678, July 30, 1947, Sec. 3.

[675] 54 Stat. 1137, October 14, 1940, Sec. 326 (d).

[676] 55 Stat. 606, July 29, 1941, Sec. 2.

[677] 65 Stat. 69, June 15, 1951, Sec. 5.

[678] 165 Proclamation No. 2931, 65 Stat. 314, June 19, 1951.

[679] 65 Stat. 75, June 19, 1951, Sec. 4.

[680] 49 Stat. 340, June 14, 1935, Sec. 2.

[681] Proclamation No. 2272, 52 Stat. 1534, January, 1938.

[682] Note 671, _supra_.

[683] 64 Stat. 798, September 8, 1950, Sec. 708 (b), (c).

[684] 64 Stat. 476, August 26, 1950.

[685] 67 Stat. 408, August 7, 1953, Sec. 3 (c), and (d); 9 (a) (4).

[686] 56 Stat. 248, April 29, 1942, Sec. 3.

[687] 56 Stat. 176, March 27, 1942, Sec. 501.

[688] 58 Stat. 723, July 3, 1944.

[689] 66 Stat. 6, February 11, 1952.

[690] Proclamation No. 2979, 66 Stat. 35, June, 1952.

[691] 63 Stat. 7, February 26, 1949, Secs. (a), (c).

[692] James C. Charlesworth, _Government Administration_ (New York:
Harper, 1951), pp. 252-53, attributes to the term “integration” the
meaning “administrative wholeness, or oneness, or entireness, or
completeness of the elements under control.” We would lend the term the
same positive tone but use it to indicate tendency or emphasis.

[693] The words “co-operation” and “co-ordination” are taken from
the texts of statutes, and it is assumed that they have distinctive
meanings in the law. “Joint decision-making” and “mutual assistance”
are obvious designations for the administrative relationships described
in the statutes concerned.

It would be digressive to incorporate any lengthy discussion of the
concepts of “co-operation” and “co-ordination” in the text of this
book. It should, however, be pointed out that they are fuzzy concepts,
indeed, as employed in standard public administration texts, and as
defined in standard dictionaries. The indices of Leonard D. White,
_Introduction to the Study of Public Administration_ (3rd ed.; New
York: Macmillan, 1948), John M. Pfiffner and R. Vance Presthus,
_Public Administration_ (3rd ed.; New York: Ronald Press, 1953),
and John D. Millet, _Management in the Public Service_ (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1954), do not list “co-operation.” Herbert A. Simon,
Donald W. Smithburg, and Victor A. Thompson, _Public Administration_
(New York: Knopf, 1950), equate administration with co-operation:
“When two men co-operate to roll a stone neither could have moved
alone, the rudiments of administration have appeared” (p. 3). “Any
activity involving the conscious co-operation of two or more persons
can be called organized activity.... Thus, by formal organization we
mean a planned system of co-operation effort in which each participant
has a recognized role to play and duties or tasks to perform” (p.
5). “... the dignity of the individual can be respected only in an
administrative situation in which all participants will gain, in one
way or another, from the accomplishment of the organization goal. In
such a situation, administration can be ‘co-operative’ in the broadest
sense” (p. 23). Charlesworth, _op. cit._, imputes to co-operation the
attributes of “a fast-moving automatic machine, every part (of which)
must be positively controlled, so that at any particular phase of the
machine’s operation, every part is in a precisely predetermined place,
and no other place” (p. 220).

Co-ordination, to James D. Mooney and Alan C. Reiley, _Onward Industry_
(New York: Harper, 1931), “expresses the principles of organization
in toto.” All other principles are merely those through which
co-ordination acts. And co-ordination means to “act together” (p. 19).
White, having criticized Mooney and Reiley for taking the concept of
co-ordination to express “the whole of administration,” suggests that
“to co-ordinate is to bring about the consistent and harmonious action
of persons with each other toward a common end” (p. 210). This, some
would regard as a shorthand definition of administration.

Charlesworth, _op. cit._, and Simon, _Administrative Behavior_, attempt
to distinguish between co-operation and co-ordination. Charlesworth’s
effort is perhaps the most elaborate, and Simon’s seems, in the context
of this study, to have the most operational utility. Charlesworth
distinguishes between “vertical and horizontal” co-ordination, and
stresses that “co-ordination is promoted both structurally and
procedurally” (pp. 245-46). Apparently attributing to the term
“integration” the same meaning previously assigned to “co-operation”
(“Administrative integration means administrative wholeness, or
oneness, or entireness, or completeness of the elements of control.”),
he distinguishes between integration and co-ordination: “Integration is
different from co-ordination in that co-ordination relates to causing
disjunct elements to work harmoniously together whereas integration
relates to the completeness and wholeness of the controls by which the
harmony is brought about....” (pp. 252-53).

Simon suggests that “Perhaps it would clarify discussion of
administrative theory to use the term ‘co-ordination’ for activity in
which the participants share a common goal, and ‘co-ordination’ for the
process of informing each as to the planned behaviors of the others.
Hence, co-operation will usually be ineffective--will not reach its
goal, whatever the intentions of the participants--in the absence of
co-ordination” (p. 72).

These quotations have been placed in juxtaposition to illustrate
existing inconsistencies and ambiguities in the use of the terms
co-operation and co-ordination in most standard works on public
administration in the United States. It would be distortive of the
purpose of this study to undertake to refine and relate these concepts.
We do suggest, however, that administrative theorists undertaking
this task could profitably seek insight in statutory materials and
administrative histories--i.e., empirical data.

[694] 53 Stat. 811, June 7, 1939, Sec. 2, 3.

[695] 53 Stat. 1407, August 11, 1939.

[696] 63 Stat. 208, June 20, 1949, Sec. 8.

[697] 66 Stat. 163, January 27, 1952, Sec. 201 (b); 202.

[698] Proclamation No. 2980, 66 Stat. 136, June 30, 1952.

[699] 61 Stat. 495, July 26, 1947, Sec. 2.

[700] 56 Stat. 351, June 11, 1942.

[701] 58 Stat. 190, April 5, 1944.

[702] 59 Stat. 231, June 5, 1945.

[703] 64 Stat. 798, September 8, 1950, Sec. 401.

[704] 56 Stat. 23, January 30, 1942, Sec. 1 (a).

[705] _Id._

[706] 64 Stat. 5, February 14, 1950, Sec. 3 (d), (e).

[707] 65 Stat. 69, June 15, 1951, Sec. 5.

[708] 48 Stat. 58, May 18, 1933, Sec. 5 (j), (k).

[709] 50 Stat. 885, September 1, 1937, Sec. 3 (a).

[710] 55 Stat. 591, July 14, 1941, Sec. 4 (s).

[711] 62 Stat. 274, May 26, 1948.

[712] 64 Stat. 438, August 11, 1950, Sec. 3 (a), (f).

[713] 64 Stat. 149, May 10, 1950, Sec. 3 (a).

[714] 66 Stat. 163, June 27, 1952.

[715] 49 Stat. 1081, August 31, 1935, Sec. 2 (a).

[716] 58 Stat. 649, July 1, 1944, Sec. 4, 5.

[717] 60 Stat. 755, August 1, 1946.

[718] 62 Stat. 266, May 25, 1948.


CHAPTER X

[719] “The Constitution as Instrument and as Symbol,” 30 _American
Political Science Review_, 1936, 1071 at 1077.

[720] Yet note Harold D. Lasswell’s suggestion: “It is important to
view the court system as a whole and not limit ourselves entirely
to the words uttered by the Supreme Court. The damage to private
rights and civilian principles can be accomplished in the thousands
of minor jurisdictions (Federal, State, Local) into which our
country is divided. Much of this damage is not brought to the notice
of the highest tribunal in the land, if at all, until years have
elapsed. In one of our earliest crises of national security, for
example, the Alien and Sedition Acts were passed (1798). Thousands
of persons were imprisoned, and the Acts were presently repealed.
Their constitutionality was never passed upon by the Supreme Court.”
_National Security and Individual Freedom_ (New York: McGraw-Hill,
1950), pp. 45-46.

[721] Albert L. Sturm, “Emergencies and the President,” II _Journal of
Politics_, 1949, 121, 141. Sturm said: “Since the judiciary handles
a mere trickle of the great issues arising in periods of crisis, it
has been unable to retain its traditional potency. When the national
security is imperiled, the Supreme Court, along with the other
branches of the government, becomes a part of the national mechanism
for preserving the existing social order.” We doubt that the Supreme
Court and the judicial system have adequately been integrated into this
effort thus far.

[722] Note, cf., _Duncan_ v. _Kahanamoku_, 327 U.S. 304 (1946), in
which Justice Black on behalf of the majority was careful to rest
upon statutory interpretation his 1946 (post mortem) invalidation
of certain aspects of military rule in the Hawaiian Islands during
the War. Dissenting, Burton and Frankfurter asked the Justices in the
majority whether the latter, if obliged to dispose of the case during
the conduct of the war, would have reached the same conclusion and
whether their holding would have been enforced by the Executive.

[723] _Op. cit._, p. 131. Rossiter concludes that “As in the past, so
in the future, President and Congress will fight our wars with little
or no thought about a reckoning with the Supreme Court.... This is a
sad moral to proclaim after so long a journey, but it is one that we
should have firmly fixed in our constitutional understanding.”


THE SUPREME COURT’S APPROACH

[724] See _Ex parte Merryman_, Fed. Cas. No. 9487 (1861), 17 Fed. Cas.,
p. 144.

[725] Carl B. Swisher, _Roger B. Taney_, New York: Macmillan, 1936, p.
567.

[726] 4 Wall. 2 (1866).

[727] _Ex parte_ Milligan, _op. cit._, at pp. 120-21, 126.

[728] _Id._, at 139.

[729] 327 U. S. 304 (1946).

[730] _Id._, at 328.

[731] _Constitutional Power and World Affairs_ (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1919).

[732] 299 U. S. 304 (1936).

[733] _Op. cit._, p. 97.

[734] _U. S._ v. _Curtiss-Wright_, _op. cit._, pp. 316-318.

[735] 323 U. S. 214 (1944).

[736] _Id._, at 244.

[737] _Id._, at 246.

[738] _Id._, at 248.

[739] Edward S. Corwin, _Total War and the Constitution_ (New York:
Knopf, 1946), p. 80.

[740] 249 U. S. 47 (1919). Holmes’ reasoning was perhaps based on J.
S. Mill’s analysis in his essay “On Liberty:” “No one pretends that
actions should be as free as opinions. On the contrary, even opinions
lose their immunity when the circumstances in which they are expressed
are such as to constitute their expression a positive instigation to
some mischievous act.” _On Liberty_ (New York: Dutton, 1950), Ch. III,
p. 152.

[741] Discussed subsequently in relation to the _Dennis_ case.

[742] 249 U. S. 47 at p. 52 (1919).

[743] _Abrams_ v. _United States_, 250 U. S. 616 (1919).

[744] _Id._, at 628-29.

[745] _Gitlow_ v. _New York_, 268 U.S. 652 (1925); _Whitney_ v.
_California_, 274 U.S. 357 (1927).

[746] 18 USC 2385.

[747] 183 F. 2d 201, 212-13 (1950). See, Robert G. McCloskey, “Free
Speech, Sedition and the Constitution,” 45 APSR, 1951, pp. 662-673.

[748] _Dennis_ v. _United States_, 341 U.S. 494 (1951). This
incidentally is one of many cases in which restrictive measures which
doubtless would have been upheld during a wartime emergency, were
sustained as a valid exercise of governmental power during peace
time. In _American Communications Association_ v. _Douds_, 339 U.
S. 382 (1949), the Court upheld the Communist oath provision of the
Taft-Hartley Act, not as justified in an emergency situation such as
we then faced, and confront today, but as a normal power of Congress
accruing to it under the Commerce Clause.

[749] _Home Bldg. & Loan Ass’n_ v. _Blaisdell_, 290 U.S. 398, 426
(1934). This is a reiteration of a quotation from his “War Powers Under
the Constitution,” 42 ABA REPORTS, 1917, 238. Also in 8 Doc. 105; 65th
Cong., 1st Sess., pp. 7-8.

[750] _Hirabayashi_ v. _United States_, 320 U.S. 81, esp. 93 (1942);
_Korematsu_ v. _United States_, 323 U.S. 214 (1944).

[751] _Bowles_ v. _Willingham_, 321 U.S. 503, esp. 519 (1944).

[752] _Op. cit._, 219. Cf. his narrow view of the meaning of martial
law in _Duncan_ v. _Kahanamoku_, _supra_, pp. 22-23.


A MORE EFFECTIVE EMERGENCY ROLE FOR THE JUDICIARY.

[753] _Ex parte Endo_, 323 U.S. 283 (1944); _Brannan_ v. _Stark_, 342
U.S. 451 (1952), are examples of the Supreme Court performing at this
modest but effective level.

[754] _The Prize Cases_, 2 Black 635 (1863), and _Hirabayashi_ v.
_United States_, _op. cit._, and _Korematsu_ v. _United States_, _op.
cit._, are examples of the judiciary’s willingness to accept _post hoc_
Congressional validation of an executive emergency program.


THE STEEL SEIZURE CASES.

[755] _Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co._ v. _Sawyer_, 343 U.S. 579.

[756] 17 Fed. Reg. 3139.

[757] The phrase is that of James Willard Hurst. _The Growth of
American Law_, (Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1950), p. 397.

[758] _Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co._ v. _Sawyer_, _op. cit._, at 582.

[759] _Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co., et al._, v. _Sawyer_, 103 F. Supp.
978.

[760] _Id._, at 980, 981.

[761] _Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co., et al._, v. _Sawyer_, 103 F. Supp.
569.

[762] _Id._, at 573.

[763] Mr. A. Holmes Baldridge, the Assistant Attorney General,
conducting the government’s defense, rejected every opportunity offered
by the District Court to justify the seizure order under a particular
clause of the Constitution, or a specific statute. See _Youngstown
Sheet & Tube Co._ v. _Sawyer_, Dockets No. 744 and 745, 1952.
Transcript of Record, _passim_. (Washington, 1952). In his brief filed
with Judge Pine on April 25, Mr. Baldridge claimed for “The President
of the United States of America ... inherent power in such a situation
to take possession of the steel companies in the manner and to the
extent which he did by his Executive Order of April 8, 1952. This power
is supported by the Constitution, by historical precedent, and by
court decisions.” _Defendant’s Opposition to Plaintiff’s Motion for a
Preliminary Injunction_--Filed April 25, 1952, p. 113.

[764] _Transcript of Record_, _op. cit._, p. 377. In addition, the
following colloquy is illuminating:

The Court: “... As I understand it, you do not assert any statutory
power.”

Mr. Baldridge: “That is correct.”

The Court: “And you do not assert any express constitutional power.”

Mr. Baldridge: “Well, Your Honor, we base the President’s power on
Sections 1, 2 and 3 or Article II of the Constitution, and whatever
inherent, implied or residual powers may flow therefrom....”

The Court: “So you contend the Executive has unlimited power in time of
emergency.”

Mr. Baldridge: “He has the power to take such action as is necessary to
meet the emergency.”

The Court: “If the emergency is great, it is unlimited, is it?”

Mr. Baldridge: “I suppose if you carry it to its logical conclusion,
that is true.”

[765] 299 U.S. 304, 316-18 (1936).

[766] Most of the literature on the subject of emergency power presents
an analysis of the range of actual power previously asserted by the
President in time of emergency.

[767] Scores of examples of such action can be gleaned from the studies
cited above, and the dissenting opinion of Chief Justice Vinson in
the _Steel Seizure_ cases, _op. cit._, at 667-710. E.g., Lincoln
directed the payment of unappropriated funds from the treasury to
private individuals, in clear violation of Article I, Sec. 9, Cl. 7
of the Constitution. In patent disregard of Article I, Sec. 8, Cl.
12, delegating to Congress the power “to raise and support armies,”
he increased the strength of the Army and Navy by presidential
proclamation. Binkley, _op. cit._, pp. 111-14. Corwin has pointed
to many administrative agencies established by President Roosevelt
without prior legislative sanction (_Total War and the Constitution_,
_op. cit._, pp. 50-52) and has alleged that the transfer of destroyers
to Britain directly violated “at least two statutes and represented
an exercise by the President of a power which by the Constitution
is specifically assigned to Congress.” (_The President: Office and
Powers_, _op. cit._, p. 289; 4th ed., 1957, p. 238).

[768] 343 U.S. 579 at 611.

[769] _Petitioners’ Brief_, p. 66.

[770] 343 U.S. 579 at 646.

[771] _Sawyer_ v. _United States Steel Co., et al._, 197 F. 2d 582
(1952). Both the government and the steel companies petitioned the
Supreme Court for _certiorari_.

[772] _Id._ Four of the nine judges dissented. The majority, citing
_United States_ v. _Russell_, 13 Wall. 623 (1871) and _United States_
v. _Pee Wee Coal Co., Inc._, 341 U.S. 114 (1951), found judicial
precedent for emergency requisitioning of property by the executive,
unsupported by statute, with a concomitant right to compensation on
the part of the property owners. Since the government claimed that
continued production of steel was vital to the national security, and
admitted the right of the companies to compensation, the majority
thought the preliminary injunction should be stayed. _Id._, at 585.

[773] 343 U.S. 937. Burton, J., with Frankfurter, J., concurring, noted
their belief that _certiorari_ should be denied until the cases had
been fully heard, on their merits, in the Court of Appeals. _Id._, at
938-39.

[774] _Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co._ v. _Sawyer_, Dockets No. 744
and 745, 1952, _Brief for Petitioner_. Perlman speaks of “inherent
constitutional power,” however. _Id._, at 113.

[775] _Id._, at 19-20.

[776] _Id._, at 102-150.

[777] _Id._, at 26.

[778] _Id._, at 73.

[779] _Id._, at 49.

[780] _Id._, at 48.

[781] _Id._, at 49.

[782] _Id._, at 16.

[783] _Little_ v. _Barreme_, 2 Cranch 170 (1804). (The above discussion
of the case closely parallels that in _Petitioner’s Brief_, pp. 44-46.)

[784] _Id._, at 588.

[785] _Id._, at 585.

[786] _Id._, at 587.

[787] _Id._

[788] _Id._

[789] “The Steel Seizure Case: A Judicial Brick Without Straw,” 53
_Columbia Law Review_, 53-66, 64-65 (1953).

[790] Frankfurter, J., _op. cit._, 589 and 593-614; Jackson, J.,
634-55; Burton, J., 655-60; Clark, J., 660-67; Douglas, J., 629-34.

[791] _Id._, at 637. This identical element is present in Justice
Clark’s concurring opinion, and perhaps it is more clearly stated.
_Id._, 660-61. Corwin says: “Only Justice Clark, however, guided by
Marshall’s opinion in the early case of _Little_ v. _Barreme_, had the
courage to draw the appropriate conclusion: Congress having entered the
field, its ascertainable intention supplied the law of the case.” _Op.
cit._, at 65.

[792] _Id._, at 634.

[793] _Id._, at 635.

[794] _Id._, at 635-637.

[795] _Id._, at 640.

[796] _Op. cit._

[797] _Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co._ v. _Sawyer_, _op. cit._, at 632.

[798] _Id._

[799] _Id._

[800] _Op. cit._, 667-710, 708. Reed and Minton, JJ. concurred in
Vinson’s dissent.


_The Steel Strike of 1959._

[801] Texts of Comments in the Steel Dispute--The President’s Letter,
_New York Times_, September 9, 1959. The Union reply appears in the
same issue; that of the major steel firms appeared in the _New York
Times_, September 10, 1959. Reprinted in the _Congressional Record_ for
September 15, 1959, pp. 18102-18103.

[802] 61 Stat. 136, 155 as amended, 29 U.S.C. 176-180.

[803] Section 206 states: “Whenever in the opinion of the President of
the United States, a threatened or actual strike or lock-out affecting
an entire industry or a substantial part thereof engaged in trade,
commerce, transportation, transmission, or communication among the
several States or with foreign nations, or engaged in the production of
goods for commerce, will, if permitted to occur or to continue, imperil
the national health or safety, he may appoint a board of inquiry to
inquire the issues involved in the dispute and to make a written report
to him within such time as he shall prescribe. Such report shall
include a statement of the facts with respect to the dispute, including
each party’s statement of its position but shall not contain any
recommendations. The President shall file a copy of such report with
the Service and shall make its contents available to the public.”

[804] The board was originally directed to make its report on October
16, 1959, but the time was extended until October 19 by Executive Order
No. 10848.

[805] Report to the President of the Board of Inquiry, Oct. 19, 1959,
pp. 11-33.

[806] _Id._, p. 28.

[807] _United Steelworkers of America_, Petitioner v. _United States of
America_, Brief for the United States in Opposition, p. 5.

[808] _Id._, pp. 11-14. Affidavits of Acting Secretary of Defense
Thomas Gates; A. R. Luedecke, General Manager of the Atomic Energy
Commission; Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of NASA.

[809] Government Brief, “The Findings of the District Court,” pp.
23-26; 71-81.

[810] Govt’s brief, p. 26.

[811] See Anthony Lewis “Supreme Court Agrees to Rule in Steel
Dispute,” _New York Times_, Tuesday, October 30, 1959, p. 1, col. 3.

[812] _United Steelworkers of America_ v. _U.S._, 361 U.S. 39 (1959).




INDEX


  A-bomb, 4

  Abaca, 91

  Abaca Production Act, 50-51

  _Abrams v. United States_, 175

  Acquisition programs, 47-54

  Administrative action, 106-109

  Administrative activity, reporting, 98-100

  Advisory Committee on Weather Control, 86-78

  Aeronautics, 124

  Agencies, 73-74, 110-124

  Agents, foreign, 74-75, 81-82, 85, 117

  Agricultural Adjustment Act, 87

  Agriculture, 16-17, 20-21

  Air Force, 33

  Air transportation, 68

  Aircraft, 122

  Aircraft research, 86

  Alaska, 38, 90

  Alien Registration Act, 40, 76, 83, 105-106

  Aliens, 119-120;
    deportation of, 76, 98;
    detention, 33-34;
    employment, 28;
    exempt from classification, 116;
    registration of, 38-39;
    restrictions, 34-35;
    subversive, 42-43

  _American Communications Association v. Douds_, 172

  American National Red Cross, 33

  Anti-aircraft material, 51

  Antitrust laws, 77

  Armed Services Procurement Act, 75

  Arms, embargoing of, 56

  Army Air Corps, 30

  Army and Navy Munitions Board, 47

  Army officers, 45, 99-100, 115

  Army Reserve, 30

  Appropriations Act, and strategic materials, 47

  Association, freedom of, 42-46

  Atomic Energy Act, 57, 59, 124

  Atomic Energy Commission, 57, 59, 97-98

  Atomic secrets, 97

  Audits, 87-92 passim

  Authority, and liberty, 1

  Aviation, 88


  Bank Conservation Act, 16, 76, 85

  Bank holiday of 1933, 15-16

  Beef import, 21

  Belligerents, trade with, 108

  Bidding during emergency, 79

  Biggs, John, 142

  Bituminous Coal Act, 46

  Black, Hugo, 6;
    on martial law, 128;
    on steel seizure cases, 137-138

  Board of Economic Warfare, 57

  Boston, maritime control area, 38

  _Bowles v. Willingham_, 175

  _Brannan v. Stark_, 175

  British Statutory Instrument Act, 102

  Butler Bill, 43


  C.I.O., and United Steelworkers, 134

  Censorship, 82-84

  Central Intelligence Agency, 92

  Central Intelligence Agency Act, 15, 79, 119-120

  Chaco resolution, 56

  Chaco War, 114

  Chase, Salmon P., 128

  Citizenship, by aliens, 34-36

  Civil Aeronautics Act, 36, 46, 114

  Civil Air patrol, 33, 122

  Civil defense, 23-24

  Civil Rights Act, 1957, 89-90

  Civilian Conservation Corps, 28, 58, 68

  Civilian labor force, 27-29

  Clark, Thomas C., on steel seizure cases, 139

  “Clear and present danger”, 130-132 passim

  Coast-defense materials, 51

  Coast Guard Reserve, 32

  Codfish, 20-21

  “Cold-War”, 32

  Collective bargaining, 62

  Columbia River, maritime control area, 38

  Commerce:
    foreign, 68;
    interstate, 68

  Commission on Civil Rights, 89

  Commodity Credit Corporation, 47

  Common carriers, 67-72

  Communications:
    definition, 111-112;
    freedom of, 73-92 passim;
    policy-making, 101;
    radio, 68;
    wire, 68

  Communications Act, 21, 24, 46, 68, 77, 104

  Communist Control Act, 41, 42

  Communist Organization Registration Act, 84

  Communists, 36, 41-43;
    registration, 82

  Communist Party, 41, 43

  Compulsory Testimony Act, 46

  Concurrent resolution, 102-103, 144, 145;
    administrative action and, 106-109;
    delegatory legislation and, 103-106

  Congress, reporting to, 93-98

  Conscription, World War II, 26-27

  Conscription Act, 31

  Conservation, 58-59

  “Constitutional dictatorship”, 5, 9, 10-11

  _Constitutional Power and World Affairs_, 129

  Constitutionalism, 12

  Construction, 63

  Consumers, 64

  Contract Settlement Act, 1944, 123

  Contracts, 59-60

  Contractors’ reports, 85-86

  Controls, 53-54, 78-80

  Coordinator of Transportation, 67

  Corporations, 88

  Corwin, Edward S., 125

  Cost of living index, 87

  Credit, 64-65, 115

  Cristobal (Panama Canal Zone), maritime control area, 38

  Critical materials, 99


  Dairy products, 20

  Davis, David, 127

  Daylight Savings Act, 107

  Decision-making, 112-124

  Defense Appropriations Act, 97

  Defense Cataloging and Standardization Act, 96

  Defense Housing and Community Facilities and Services Act, 75

  Defense Production Act (1940), 42

  Defense Production Act (1950), 28, 45, 48, 52, 53, 59, 60, 61, 64,
    66, 74, 97, 115, 116, 121

  Defense Supply Management Agency, 96

  _Dennis v. United States_, 132, 172

  Depression, 15-18

  “Dictator”, meaning of term, 11-12

  Dictatorship doctrine, 5

  Director of Mutual Security, 48

  District of Columbia Appropriation Act, 42

  Domestic Minerals Program Extension Act, 48, 75

  _Duncan v. Kahanamoku_, 128, 171


  Economic Co-operation Act, 96

  Economic Co-operation Administration, 121

  Economy Act, 87

  Eisenhower, Dwight D.:
    and 1959 steel strike, 139-143;
    defense appropriations, 93-94;
    writ of habeas corpus suspended, 4

  Electric power, 49

  _Elements of Political Economy_, 7

  Emergencies, 14-25;
    definition and nature, 14;
    Democratic concept, 4-13;
    economic, 15-21;
    intensity of, 14, 15;
    natural catastrophes, 21-22;
    varieties of, 14, 15-24

  Emergency Appropriation Act, 21

  Emergency Detention Act, 1950, 24, 25

  Emergency government, and the judiciary, 133-134

  Emergency powers, 4-13;
    executive branch and, 1-3;
    extra-constitutional sources, 128-130;
    Friedrich on, 9-10;
    legislative restraints on, 93-109;
    of the Government, 135;
    of the President, 148;
    over persons, 26-46;
    Supreme Court and, 125-126

  Emergency Powers Continuation Act, 69

  Emergency Powers Interim Continuation Act, 98

  Emergency Price Control Act, 2, 18-19, 46, 54, 66, 76, 80-81, 121

  Emergency Railroad Transportation Act, 19, 67, 76-77, 112-113

  Eminent domain, 49-54 passim

  Employees of government:
    national security and, 45-46;
    restrictions on, 44;
    suspension of, 95;
    termination for security reasons, 116-117

  Employment Act, 88

  Enterprise, private, 75

  Espionage, 34, 43

  Espionage Act, 130

  Exchange control, 65

  Executive action, 104, 107-108

  Executive branch, 1-3

  _Ex parte Endo_, 173

  _Ex parte Merryman_, 172

  _Ex parte Milligan_, 127, 147

  Expatriation Act, 36

  Explosives, 12

  Exports:
    licenses, 100;
    policy, post-World War II era, 58;
    restrictions on, 56-58

  Export Control Act, 57, 58, 65, 81, 83, 118


  Fair Labor Standards Act, 46

  Famine, 21-22

  Far Eastern Economic Assistance Act, 121

  Farmers, 60, 120

  Federal Aid Highway Act, 107

  Federal Civil Defense Act, 23-24, 104-105

  Federal Civil Defense Agency, 49, 75, 88

  Federal Communications Commission, 68, 101

  Federal Defense Act, 75

  Federal Emergency Relief Act, 16, 99

  Federal Emergency Relief Administrator, 99

  Federal Reserve Board, 64

  Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, 44

  Federal Power Act, 46

  Federal Power Commission, 101

  Federal Trade Commission Act, 77

  Fibers, Philippine, 116

  First Decontrol Act, 25, 59

  First War Powers Act, 23, 65, 79

  Five-cent pieces, 58

  Fleet Reserve, 30

  Flood-control, 21, 120

  Food to India, 122

  Foreign Agents Registration Act, 74, 81, 85, 112;
    amendment, 40-41, 81, 85, 117

  France, commerce with U.S., 137

  Frankfurter, Felix, 135

  Friedrich, Carl J., 9-10, 96

  Fruit fly, 91

  Fuels, 48, 50, 53


  General Motors, 61

  General Staff Corps, 29

  German-American Bund, 43

  _Gitlow v. New York_, 132, 175

  Gold Reserve Act, 17

  Goods and materials, control of, 55-59

  Government, 1, 47-54

  Grasshoppers, 99

  Guayule, 49-50

  Guided missiles, 98

  Gulf of Panama, maritime control area, 38


  H-bomb, 4

  Habeas corpus, writ of, 4

  Hand, Learned, 132

  Hawaiian Maritime Control Area, 37

  Helium, 49, 100

  Helium Gas Conservation Act, 49, 122

  Highway construction, 107-108

  _Hirabayashi v. U.S._, 175

  Hoarding, 74

  Holmes, Oliver Wendell on _Schenck_ case, 130-131;
    on U.S. intervention in Russia case, 131-132

  Holtzoff, Alexander, 134

  _Home Building and Loan Association v. Blaisdell_, 175

  Hostilities of War, 24

  Hours, working, 27, 62

  House Concurrent Resolution, 108, 155

  Housing, 19-20, 75, 88

  Housing and Rent Act (1948), 88

  Housing and Rent Act (1949), 20

  Housing and Rent Act, 77

  Hughes, Charles Evans, 132


  I.C.C., 69

  Immigration and Nationality Act, 97, 120, 123

  Immigration and naturalization, 105-106, 120

  Immigration and Naturalization Committee of the House, 98

  Imports, 114

  Independent Offices Appropriation Act, 79

  India Emergency Food Aid Act, 21, 115, 121

  Industrial Alcohol Act, 46

  Industrial plants, 52

  Industries, seizure of, 14;
    1940, 54

  Inflation, 18-19

  Information, 73-87, 91-92

  Intelligence, agency network formed, 92

  Interagency relationships, 110-124

  Interior Department Appropriation Act, 23

  Internal Security Act, 34-43 passim, 82

  International powers of states, 147

  Interstate commerce, 87

  Interstate Commerce Act, 46

  Interstate Commerce Commission, 69

  Invention Secrecy Act, 80

  Inventions, patents for, 80

  Inventories, 87-92 passim

  Investigations, 87-92 passim

  Investment Advisers Act, 46

  Investment Company Act, 46


  Jackson, Robert H., on Japanese relocation case, 129-130;
    on emergency powers, 136;
    on steel seizure cases, 138-139

  Japanese Americans, 34-37

  Japanese Claims Act, 99

  Japanese Evacuation Claims Act, 77, 99

  Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, 97, 145

  Joint Committee on Foreign Economic Co-operation, 96-97

  Joint Committee on Organization of Congress, 89

  Joint Resolution, 102, 103

  Judicial review, 125-143

  Judiciary, emergency control, 133-134


  Korea, 31, 121

  _Korematsu v. U.S._, 129-130, 132, 133, 147, 173


  Labor, convict, 62

  Labor-Management Relations Act, 14-15, 19, 28, 44, 63, 75, 101,
    140, 142

  Labor relations control, 61-63

  Land acquisition, 48-49

  Lead, duties on, 118

  Legislation, delegatory, 103-106

  Legislative veto, 105-106, 108-109

  Lend-Lease Act, 107

  Liberty and authority, 1

  Little, Captain, 137

  _Little v. Barreme_, 139, 177

  Locke, John, 5-7, 145


  Machiavelli, Niccolo, 7-8

  McIlwain, Charles H., 12-13

  Manhattan Project, 79

  Marine Corps, 30, 32-33

  Marine Corps Reserve, 30

  Maritime Commission, 60, 70-71, 122

  Maritime Control Areas, 37-38

  Maritime salvage operations, 52

  Marshall, John, on seizures, 137

  Materials, 58, 60

  Mediterranean Fruit Fly Board, 91

  Merchant Marine Act, 1936, 46, 51-52, 70

  Merchant Marine Reserve, 30

  Merryman, John, 126

  Metals, strategic, 48

  Military conscription, 28

  Military equipment, 51

  Military Services, 29-35 passim

  Military sites and productive facilities, 48-52

  Military training, 101-102

  Mill, James, 7

  Mill, John Stuart, 7

  _Milligan_ case, 127, 128

  Mineral resources, 47-48

  Mitchell, James P., 143

  Mobilization, 1

  Motor Carrier Act, 46

  Motor carriers, 69

  Movement, circumscribing, 36-38

  Municipal Bankruptcy Act, 16

  Munitions, 39, 53, 85

  Murphy, Frank, on martial law, 128

  Mutual Defense Assistance Act (1949), 95, 99, 104

  Mutual Defense Assistance Act, (1951), embargo on war implements,
    95-96

  Mutual Security Act, 48, 78, 95


  National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, 86, 124

  National Defense Act (1916), 29-33 passim

  National Defense Act (1940), 24

  National Guard, 29, 30

  National Industrial Recovery Act, 17, 61-63, 85, 87

  National Labor Relations Act, 46

  National Labor Relations Board, 42

  National Mediation Board, 68

  National Military Establishment Appropriation Act, 79

  National Munitions Control Board, 39, 56, 85, 100, 123

  National Science Foundation, 86, 123

  National Science Foundation Act, 28

  National Security Act, 120

  National security airspace, 114

  National security emergencies, 22-25

  National Security Training Commission, 102

  National Security Training Corps, 23, 102

  Nationality Act, 35, 115

  Nationals, foreign, asylum of, 119-120

  Natural catastrophes, 21-22

  Natural Gas Act, 46

  Naturalization and communists, 36

  Naval Reserve, 30

  Naval Reserve Policy Board, 112

  Nazi aggression, 162

  Nepotism, 78

  Neutrality Act (1935), 22, 37, 39, 85, 123;
    amendments, 37, 56-57, 65, 69-72, 85, 100

  Neutrality Act, 1939, 78, 104, 108, 159

  Neutrality emergencies, 22-23

  Neutrality Proclamation, 37

  New York-New Jersey Civil Defense Compact, 24

  N.I.R.A., 62, 67

  Nitrogen for defense, 49, 86

  Nixon, Richard M., 2nd steel strike settlement, 143


  Office of Civilian Defense, 23, 123

  Office of Price Administration, 66

  Officers’ Reserve Corps, 29

  Oil, 58, 85

  Opinions, dissemination of, 83-84

  Orders, compulsory, 60-61

  Ore, 90

  Organized Reserves, 30


  Padre Island Sea Range Area, 38

  Patents, 80

  Pay, rates of, 62

  Pearl Harbor, 30, 92

  Pensions, 87

  Perlman, Philip B., 136

  Persons, circumscribing movement of, 36-38

  Petroleum reserves, 100

  Philippine War Damage Commission, 113

  Pilots, training of, 27

  Pine, David A., 134-135

  Pipe-lines, 52, 68

  Plant protection force, 104

  Policy-making, 88-91

  Population, 1

  Powers over persons, 26-46

  President:
    concurrent resolutions, 102-103;
    determination of an emergency, 24-25;
    emergency powers of, 144-147;
    furnishing of privately owned plants, 53;
    loan of naval vessels, 96;
    materials for national defense, 51;
    pipe-line construction, 52;
    purchase of defense materials, 53;
    report on government owned facilities, 99;
    reserves to active duty, 30-31;
    seizure of industries, 54;
    wire communications, 104

  President’s Reorganization Plan, No. 1, 105

  Price Administrator, 54

  Price control, 19, 65-67, 76, 101, 121

  Price Control Act (1942), 66

  Price Control Act (1946), 101

  Printing presses, listing of, 84, 164

  Priorities, 59-60

  Private enterprises, 52-53

  “Proclaimed List of Certain Blocked Nationals”, 35-36, 74

  Production controls, 62-63

  Profits, 63-64

  Project Mercury, 141

  Propaganda dissemination, 39, 81-82

  Property, government and private enterprise, 49, 52-72 passim

  Public opinion, 75-77

  Public Resolution No. 1, 57

  Public utilities, 52

  Public Utility Holding Company Act, 46

  Public works, 62

  Publicity, 74-75

  Puget Sound, maritime control area, 38


  Quality, protection of, 61


  Railroad Retirement Act, 89

  Railroad Retirement Board, 88-89

  Railroad Unemployment Insurance Act, 46

  Railroads, rehabilitation of, 67

  Railway Labor Act, 19, 68

  Raw materials, 48

  Real estate, 64

  Reciprocal Tariff Act, 76

  Reconstruction Finance Corporation, 65, 115;
    credit to agencies, 121-122;
    liquidated, 91

  Regular Army Reserve, 3O

  Renegotiation Act, 19, 64

  Rent, 66

  Reorganizations Acts:
    (1932), 103;
    (1939), 103, 105;
    (1945), 105;
    (1949), 105, 108

  Reorganization Plans 1 and 2, 108

  Reporting requirements, 77-78, 85-86

  Reserve Officers’ Training Corps, 29-30

  Retirement, railroad, changes made, 88-89

  Rights of individuals, 46

  Roosevelt, Franklin Delano, 2, 15-17, 19, 21, 22, 23, 35-37

  Rossiter, Clinton L., 10-11, 126

  Rousseau, Jean Jacques, 6-7

  Rubber, 49-50, 59, 90-91

  Rubber Producing Facilities Disposal Act, 43-44, 90, 106

  Rubber Producing Facilities Disposal Commission, 90, 117

  “Rule of anticipated reaction”, 96

  Russia and Lend-Lease Act, 107


  Sabotage, 34, 43

  Salaries, 66-67, 87

  San Francisco, maritime control area, 38

  _Sawyer v. U.S. Steel Co. et al._, 174

  _Schechter Poultry Corporation v. U.S._, 62

  _Schenck_ case, 130-131

  Sciences, research in, 86

  Second War Powers Act, 2-28, 46, 49, 52, 58-61, 63-64, 86-88, 107, 117

  Securities Exchange Act, 17, 18, 46, 85

  Selective Service Act (1948), 28

  Selective Training and Service Act (1940), 31-32, 43, 54, 60;
    extension (1945), 24

  Senate Committee on Immigration, 98

  Senate Resolution, 147, (1949), 108

  _Shapiro v. U.S._, 46

  Sherman Anti-Trust Act, 46

  Silberner, Edmund, 7

  Simon, Herbert A., 111-112

  Simple resolution, 102, 103

  Sixth Supplemental National Defense Appropriations Act, 100

  Skills, essential, 28-29

  Small Business Administration, 65, 75, 91-92

  Small Business Concerns Mobilization Act, 52-53, 91, 120

  Smaller War Industries Administration, 65

  Smaller War Plants Corp., 52-53, 91

  Social Security Act, 46

  Staley, Austin L., 142

  Standardization, 96

  Statute books, 1, 2

  _Steel Seizure_ cases, 5, 126, 134-139, 173

  Steel strike of 1959, 139-144

  Stockpiling, 47-48, 55, 90, 119

  Strikes, 28, 44, 75, 101

  Subcontracts, 91

  Subversive Activities Control Act, 35

  Subversive Activities Control Board, 42, 43, 82, 84

  Sugar Act, 20

  Supplemental Defense Appropriations Act (1942), 64

  Supplemental National Defense Appropriations Act (1948), 94

  Supplies, 55, 75

  _Supreme Court and the Commander-in-Chief_, 126

  Sutherland, George, 128-129


  Taft-Hartley Act, 19, 140, 141, 143

  Taney, Roger B., 126, 127

  Tariff Act, 1930:
    amendment, (1934), 18, 114;
    importation of beef and, 21;
    war emergency and, 24

  Tariffs, reduction of, 76

  Tennessee Valley Authority Act, 49, 56, 73-74, 86, 101, 122

  Terminating power and programs, 103-104, 106-107

  Testimony, secrecy of, 80-81

  Theorists, 5-11

  Tobacco Control Act, 20

  Transportation, 1

  Travel restrictions, 37

  Treason, 36

  Truman, Harry S., 20, 34, 134-139 passim


  Unions, labor, 62

  United States:
    access to, by aliens, 34-36;
    commerce with France, 14;
    1799, 137

  U.S. Bureau of Mines, 50

  U.S. Congress:
    administrative accounting to, 98-102;
    banking emergency, 16;
    concurrent resolution, 103-106;
    construction of public utilities, 52;
    co-operation with President, 93;
    dairy products investigation, 20-21;
    determination of an emergency, 24-25;
    determination of strategic materials, 47;
    emergency powers, 1, 2;
    establishment of guided missiles proving grounds, 98;
    executive function of committees, 93-94;
    famine legislation, 21-22;
    informing and advising, 100-101;
    oversight of administration, 109;
    review of administrative action, 102-103;
    study and report on, 89

  U.S. Constitution, 125, 147;
    as a flexible charter, 130-133;
    as a restrictive document, 126-128

  U.S. Department of Interior Appropriation Act, 46

  U.S. Library of Congress:
    deposit of political propaganda copy, 81;
    request of foreign printed matter, 112

  U.S. Navy, and furnishing of privately-owned plants, 49, 51-54 passim;
    increased military strength authorized, (1946), 32-33

  U.S. Navy Department, 47

  U.S. Navy Department Appropriations Act (1941), 27, 53

  U.S. Secretary of Agriculture:
    agricultural emergency, 17;
    control of grasshoppers, 99;
    government use of rubber and, 49-50

  U.S. Secretary of Defense:
    disposition of naval vessels, 96;
    reporting to Congress on national defense, 94-96;
    training of the Armed Forces, 97

  U.S. Secretary of the Air Force, 48-49

  U.S. Secretary of the Interior:
    determination of strategic materials, 47;
    liquid fuels program, 50

  U.S. Secretary of the Navy:
    Congressional reporting, 95, 99, 100;
    emergency measures, 65;
    extended military enlistments 30;
    leasing petroleum reserves, 100;
    plant protection force, 104;
    possession of war production plants, 52-54;
    strategic materials and, 40, 51, 52

  U.S. Secretary of War:
    annual report of contracts, 100;
    emergency measures of, 58;
    land acquisition, 48, 52;
    materials for national defense, 51;
    possession of war production plants, 54;
    regulation of working hours, 27;
    wartime powers, 44-45

  U.S. Supreme Court:
    emergency government, 125-126;
    emergency power, 2, 4-5, 126-133;
    role in emergency action, 144;
    steel strike of 1959, 142-143;
    the Constitution, 133

  _U.S. v. Curtiss-Wright Export Corporation_, 129, 135, 147, 172

  _U.S. v. Pee Wee Coal Co._, 174

  _U.S. v. Russell_, 174

  United Steelworkers of America, 139-143 passim

  _United Steel Workers of America_, Petitioner, v. _United States,
    et al._, 142, 175

  Universal Military Training and Service Act (1940), amendment (1951),
    23, 32, 92, 101-102, 106, 116


  Vessels:
    acquisition of, 51, 52;
    foreign, in American waters, 71-72;
    naval, 86, 117

  Veterans’ Emergency Housing Act, 19-20

  Vinson, Fred M., 139

  Vinson-Trammell Act, 1934, 63

  Volunteer Reserve, 30

  von Braun, Werner, 28

  Vote, right to, 89


  Wages, 66-67, 101, 121

  War:
    controls, 107;
    damage, compensation for, 113;
    implements of, 95;
    material, exporting of, 77

  War Labor Disputes Act, 19, 44, 54, 62

  War Powers Acts (1941), 84;
    (1942), 69

  War Production Board, 60, 77

  War Risk Insurance Act, 114, 116

  Water-supply facilities, 49

  Watkins, Frederick M., 9

  Weather, control of, 86-87

  _White v. Steer_, 128

  _Whitney v. California_, 132, 172

  Wire communication facilities, 104

  Women’s Armed Services Integration Act, 33


  _Youngstown Sheet and Tube Co. v. Sawyer_, 126, 134, 148, 150, 174-175

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber’s Notes:

The anchors for the endnotes have been relabeled consecutively through
the document, and the following additional endnote changes were made:

p. 8: Endnote anchor inserted (a long time.”[27])

p. 95: Endnote anchor inserted (of the Act.[563])

p. 119: Endnote anchor inserted (thus far reviewed.[692])

p. 120: Endnote anchor inserted (farm equipment.[701] The)

p. 158: Endnote 352 is missing in the original text and was added

p. 173: Endnote anchor removed (Steel Seizure Cases.)

Punctuation has been made consistent.

Variations in spelling and hyphenation were retained as they appear in
the original publication, except that obvious typographical errors have
been corrected.

The following changes were made:

p. 163: Foiunlin changed to Toulmin and Dairy changed to Diary (Harry
A. Toulmin, Jr., _Diary of Democracy_)

p. 183: 176?? changed to 173 (_Steel Seizure_ cases, 5, 126, 134-139,
173)

p. 184: 7 changed to 77 (War Production Board, 60, 77)





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POWERS OF THE PRESIDENT DURING CRISES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The ceramic art of Great Britain from pre-historic times down to the present day, Volume 2 (of 2)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The ceramic art of Great Britain from pre-historic times down to the present day, Volume 2 (of 2)
        being a history of the ancient and modern pottery and porcelain works of the kingdom and of their productions of every class

Author: Llewellynn Frederick William Jewitt

Release date: July 18, 2024 [eBook #74068]

Language: English

Original publication: London: Virtue and Co., Limited, 1878

Credits: Charlene Taylor, Karin Spence and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CERAMIC ART OF GREAT BRITAIN FROM PRE-HISTORIC TIMES DOWN TO THE PRESENT DAY, VOLUME 2 (OF 2) ***





                                  THE

                              CERAMIC ART

                                  OF

                             GREAT BRITAIN

            FROM PRE-HISTORIC TIMES DOWN TO THE PRESENT DAY

               BEING A HISTORY OF THE ANCIENT AND MODERN

                      POTTERY AND PORCELAIN WORKS

                            OF THE KINGDOM

               _AND OF THEIR PRODUCTIONS OF EVERY CLASS_

                                  BY
                       LLEWELLYNN JEWITT, F.S.A.
       LOCAL SECRETARY OF THE SOCIETY OF ANTIQUARIES OF LONDON;
     HON. AND ACTUAL MEMBER OF THE RUSSIAN IMPERIAL ARCHÆOLOGICAL
             COMMISSION, AND STATISTICAL COMMITTEE, PSKOV;
   MEMBER OF THE ROYAL ARCHÆOLOGICAL INSTITUTE OF GREAT BRITAIN AND
                               IRELAND;
          ASSOCIATE OF THE BRITISH ARCHÆOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION;
    HON. MEMBER OF THE ESSEX ARCHÆOLOGICAL SOCIETY AND OF THE MANX
                            SOCIETY, ETC.;
             COR. MEMBER OF THE ROYAL HISTORICAL SOCIETY,
                            ETC. ETC. ETC.

           _ILLUSTRATED WITH NEARLY TWO THOUSAND ENGRAVINGS_

                         IN TWO VOLUMES.--II.

                                LONDON
                 VIRTUE AND CO., LIMITED, 26, IVY LANE
                            PATERNOSTER ROW
                                 1878

                       [_All rights reserved._]




                                LONDON:
                  PRINTED BY VIRTUE AND CO., LIMITED,
                              CITY ROAD.




                         CONTENTS OF VOL. II.


                              CHAPTER I.

                                                                   PAGE

    Potteries of the Tyne, Tees, and
    Wear--Newcastle-on-Tyne--Warburton Pottery--Newcastle
    Pottery or Forth Banks Pottery--Stepney Bank
    Pottery--Ouseburn Bridge Pottery--Ouseburn Ford
    Pottery--Ouseburn Potteries--Low Pottery--South
    Shore Pottery--Phœnix Pottery--St. Peter’s
    Pottery--Gateshead--Carr’s Hill Pottery--St. Anthony’s
    Pottery--Sherriff Hill Pottery--Tyne Main Pottery--North
    Shields--Low Light Pottery--South Shields--Tyne or Shields
    Pottery--North Hylton--South Hylton or Ford--Southwick
    Pottery--Wear Pottery--High Southwick Pottery--Deptford
    Pottery--Monkwearmouth--Sheepfold Pottery--Sunderland
    Pottery and the Garrison Pottery--Seaham
    Harbour--Newbottle--Bishop Auckland--New Moor
    Pottery--Stockton-on-Tees--Stafford Pottery--North Shore
    Pottery--Middlesborough-on-Tees--Wolviston Pottery--Coxhoe
    Pottery--Alnwick                                                  1


                              CHAPTER II.

    Liverpool Pottery--Shaw’s Delft Ware--Shaw’s
    Brow--Zachariah Barnes--Sadler and Green--Transfer
    Printing--Wedgwood’s Printed Ware--Drinkwater’s
    Works--Spencer’s Pottery--Richard Chaffers--Reid and
    Co.’s Works--The Penningtons--Patrick’s Hill Works--The
    Flint Pottery--Herculaneum Works--Warrington Pottery and
    China--Runcorn--Prescot--St. Helen’s--Seacombe                   18


                             CHAPTER III.

    Derby--Cock-pit Hill--Mayer--Heath--Derby
    China--Andrew Planche--Duesbury and Heath--William
    Duesbury--Purchase of the Chelsea Works--Weekly
    Bills--Show Rooms in London--Sales by Candle--Changes
    in Proprietorship--Bloor--Locker--Stevenson
    & Co.--Hancock--Painters and
    Modellers--Spengler--Coffee--Askew--Billingsley--Pinxton--
    Nantgarw--Swansea--Other Artists employed at Derby--Cocker
    and Whitaker’s China Works, &c., &c.                             56


                              CHAPTER IV.

    Chesterfield--Caskon--Heathcote--Brampton--Posset
    Pots--Puzzle Jugs--Welshpool and Payne
    Potteries--The Pottery--Walton Pottery--Wheatbridge
    Pottery--Alma, Barker, and London
    Potteries--Whittington--Bromley--Jewitt--Newbold--Eckington
    --Belper--Codnor Park--Denby--Bournes Pottery--Shipley--
    Alfreton--Langley Mills--Ilkeston--Pinxton--Pinxton China--China
    Tokens--Wirksworth--Dale Abbey--Repton--Encaustic
    Tiles--Tile Kilns, London--Tickenhall--Kings
    Newton--Burton-on-Trent--Swadlincote Potteries--Church
    Gresley Potteries--Gresley Common--Woodville--Hartshorne,
    &c.--Wooden Box--Rawdon Works--Pool Works--Coleorton--&c.,
    &c.                                                             115


                              CHAPTER V.

    Stoke-upon-Trent--Josiah Spode--Copeland and
    Garrett--Copeland and Sons--Mintons--Hollins--Trent
    Pottery; Jones--Albert Street Works--Copeland Street
    Works--Glebe Street and Wharf Street Works--Copeland
    Street--Bridge Works--London Road; Goss--Kirkham--Campbell
    Brick and Tile Company--Harrison and Wedgwood--Bankes--Hugh
    Booth--Ephraim Booth--Wolf--Bird--Adams and Son--H. and R.
    Daniel--Boyle--Reade--Lowndes and Hall                          167


                              CHAPTER VI.

    Burslem--Early Potters--Earthenware
    Gravestones--Toft--Talor--Sans--Turnor--Shawe--Mitchell--
    Cartwright--Rich--Wood--Wood & Caldwell--Churchyard Works--
    Bell Works--Red Lion Works--Big House--Ivy House--Lakin &
    Poole--Waterloo Works--Boote & Co.--Washington Works--Nile Street
    Works--Newport Pottery--Dale Hall--Stubbs--Bates--Walker
    & Co.--Mayer & Co.--Dale Hall Pottery--Rogers--Edwards
    & Son--Dale Hall Tile Company--Albert Street
    Works--Mersey Pottery--Steel--Maddock & Son--New Wharf
    Pottery--Over House Works--Swan Bank Pottery--Hill Top
    Pottery--Hill Pottery China Works--Crown Works--Scotia
    Works--Queen Street Works--Hill Works--Ralph
    Wood--Sylvester Pottery--High Street Pottery--Sneyd
    Pottery--Hadderidge Pottery--Navigation Works--Sytch
    Pottery--Kiln Croft Works--Albert Pottery--Waterloo
    Works--Central Pottery--Longport--Davenports--Terra
    Cotta--Brownhills--Wood--Littler--Marsh and
    Heywood--Brownhills Pottery Company--Cobridge--Cobridge
    Works, Brownfields--Clews--Furnivals--Bates &
    Bennett--Abbey Pottery--Villa Pottery--Cockson &
    Seddon--Alcock & Co.--Elder Road Works--Warburton--Daniel, &c.  236


                             CHAPTER VII.

    Hanley and Shelton--Miles--Phillips--Astbury--Baddeley--
   Edwards--Voyez--Palmer--Neale--Wilson--New Hall
    Works--Hollins--Keeling--Turner--Warburton--Clowes--Bagnall--New
    Hall Company--Richard
    Champion--Glass--Twyford--Mare--Twemlow--Old Hall
    Works--Meigh--Broad Street Works--Mason--Ashworth--Cauldon
    Place--Ridgways--Browne-Westhead & Co.--Trent
    Pottery--Keeling--Booth & Co.--Stafford Street
    Works--Church Works--Waterloo Works--Kensington
    Works--Burton Place Works--Clarence Street Works--Nelson
    Place--Phœnix and Bell Works--Bedford Works--Mayer
    Street--Cannon Street Works--Brewery Street--Percy Street
    Works--Taylor, Tunnicliffe & Co.--Biller & Co.--Albion
    Works--Eastwood Vale--Eastwood Works--Dental Manufacturing
    Company--Trent Pottery--James Dudson--Victoria
    Works--Charles Street Works--High Street--Eagle
    Works--Brook Street Works--Cannon Street--William
    Stubbs--Norfolk Street Works--Broad Street--Albert
    Works--Ranelagh Works--Swan Works--Mayer Street
    Works--Brook Street Works--Dresden Works--Bath Street
    Works--Waterloo Works--New Street Pottery--Castle Field
    Pottery--Henry Venables                                         298


                             CHAPTER VIII.

    Etruria--Josiah Wedgwood--The Wedgwood Family--Indenture
    of Apprenticeship--Ridge House Estate--Etruria Works
    founded--Thomas Bentley--Flaxman--Catalogues of
    Goods--Jasper and other Wares--Portland Vase--Monument
    to Josiah Wedgwood--Marks--Various productions of the
    Works--M. Lessore                                               345


                              CHAPTER IX.

    Longton--Sutherland Road Works--Market Street Works--High
    Street Works--Park Works--Sheridan Works--Commerce
    Street Works--Crown Works--Stafford Street Works--Peel
    Pottery--King Street Works--Chancery Lane Works--St.
    Mary’s Works--Commerce Street--New Town Pottery--Borough
    Pottery--High Street--New Street--Prince of Wales
    Pottery--High Street Works--Alma Works--Market
    Street--Victoria Works--Stafford Street--Russell
    Street--Mount Pleasant Works--High Street--British Anchor
    Works--Royal Porcelain Works--Stafford Street--St.
    Gregory’s Pottery--Gold Street Works--Wellington
    Works--St. Martin’s Lane--Heathcote Works--Green
    Dock Works--Chadwick Street--Baddeley--Waterloo
    Works--Heathcote Road Pottery--Sutherland Potteries--Church
    Street--Cornhill Works--Sutherland Works--St.
    James’s Place--Daisy Bank--Park Hall Street--Viaduct
    Works--Beech, King Street--Anchor Pottery--Dresden
    Works--Palissy Works--Fenton, Minerva Works--Victoria
    Works--Fenton Potteries--Fenton Pottery--Foley--Old
    Foley Pottery--Anchor Works--Fenton Potteries--Lane
    Delph Pottery--Grosvenor Works--Park Works--Foley
    Pottery--Foley Potteries--Foley China Works--King Street
    Works--Heath--Bacchus--Meir--Harrison--Martin--Miles
    Mason--Whieldon--Wedgwood &
    Harrison--Turner--Garner--Edwards--Johnson--Phillips--
    Bridgwood--Greatbach--Greenwood--Heathcote, &c.                 386


                              CHAPTER X.

    Tunstall--Early Potters--Enoch
    Booth--Child--Winter--Unicorn and Pinnox
    Works--Greenfield Works--Newfield Works--George Street
    Pottery--Phœnix Works--Sandyford--Lion Works--Victoria
    Works--Swan Bank Works--Church Bank Works--Well
    Street Works--Old Works--Black Bank--High Street
    Works--Woodland Pottery--Greengate Pottery--Sandyford
    Works--Tunstall Works--Highgate Pottery--Clay Hill
    Pottery--Royal Albert Works--Soho Works--Marshall &
    Co.--Walton--Stevenson--Birch--Eastwood--Shorthose
    & Co.--Heath &
    Son--Newcastle-under-Lyme--Tobacco-pipes--Charles
    Riggs--Garden Edgings--Thomas Wood--Terra Cotta
    Works--Armitage--Lichfield--Penkhull, &c.                       423


                              CHAPTER XI.

    Swansea--Cambrian Pottery--Dillwyn’s Etruscan Ware--Swansea
    China--Glamorgan Pottery--Rickard’s Pottery--Landore
    Pottery--Llanelly--South Wales Pottery--Ynisymudw--Terra
    Cotta Works--Nantgarw--Billingsley--Nantgarw
    China--Brown and Stoneware Potteries--Cardigan--Cardigan
    Potteries--Hereford--Lugwardine Tile Works--Torquay--Terra
    Cotta Works--Alderholt--Smethwick--Reading--Coley Avenue
    Works--Wakefield Moor--Houghton’s Table of Clays--Ditchling
    Pottery, &c.--Amblecote--Leicester--Spinney Hill
    Works--Wednesbury--Winchester--Aylesford--Exeter--Lincoln       435


                             CHAPTER XII.

    Irish Ceramics--Early Pottery of Ireland--The
    Cairns--The Crannogs--Mediæval Pottery of
    Ireland--Dublin--Delamain--Stringfellow--Grants by
    Irish Parliament--Donovan--Delft Ware--Brown Ware
    Manufactories--Belfast--Leathes and Smith--Delft
    Ware--Coates’ Pottery--China Works--Florence Court
    Pottery--Coal Island Pottery--Youghal Pottery--Captain
    Beauclerc’s Terra Cotta--Larne Pottery Works--Castle Espie
    Pottery--Belleek China and Earthenware Works, &c.               459


                             CHAPTER XIII.

    Early Pottery of Scotland--Cinerary Urns--Mediæval
    Pottery--Glasgow--Delft Ware--Verreville
    Pottery--Garnkirk Works--Gartcosh Works--Heathfield
    Pottery--Glasgow Pottery--North British Pottery--Saracen
    Pottery--Port Dundas Pottery Company--Hyde Park
    Potteries--Britannia Pottery--Annfield Pottery--Bridgeton
    Pottery--Barrowfield Pottery--Coatbridge--Glenboig
    Star Works--Glenboig Fire-Clay Works--Cardowan and
    Heathfield Works--Paisley--Ferguslie Works--Shortroods
    and Caledonia Works--Paisley Earthenware Works--Crown
    Works--Grangemouth--Fire-brick Works--Greenock--Clyde
    Pottery--Dumbarton--Rutherglen--Caledonia
    Pottery--Portobello--Midlothian Potteries--Portobello
    Pottery--Kirkcaldy--Sinclairtown Pottery--Kirkcaldy
    Pottery--Gallatown Pottery--Boness--Boness
    Pottery--Prestonpans Pottery--Alloa--Alloa Pottery--The
    Hebrides                                                        499


                             CHAPTER XIV.

    A List of Patents relating to Ceramics from 1626 to 1877        524




                     CERAMIC ART IN GREAT BRITAIN.




                              CHAPTER I.

   Potteries of the Tyne, Tees, and
   Wear--Newcastle-on-Tyne--Warburton Pottery--Newcastle Pottery
   or Forth Banks Pottery--Stepney Bank Pottery--Ouseburn Bridge
   Pottery--Ouseburn Ford Pottery--Ouseburn Potteries--Low
   Pottery--South Shore Pottery--Phœnix Pottery--St. Peter’s
   Pottery--Gateshead--Carr’s Hill Pottery--St. Anthony’s
   Pottery--Sherriff Hill Pottery--Tyne Main Pottery--North
   Shields--Low Light Pottery--South Shields--Tyne or Shields
   Pottery--North Hylton--South Hylton or Ford--Southwick
   Pottery--Wear Pottery--High Southwick Pottery--Deptford
   Pottery--Monkwearmouth--Sheepfold Pottery--Sunderland Pottery
   and the Garrison Pottery--Seaham Harbour--Newbottle--Bishop
   Auckland--New Moor Pottery--Stockton-on-Tees--Stafford
   Pottery--North Shore Pottery--Middlesborough-on-Tees--Wolviston
   Pottery--Coxhoe Pottery--Alnwick.

The following brief account of the earthenware works of
Newcastle-upon-Tyne and its district, drawn up for the British
Association, in 1863, by Mr. C. T. Maling, one of the manufacturers,
may serve as an introduction to this chapter. “The manufacture of
white earthenware was introduced into this district by Mr. Warburton,
at Carr’s Hill Pottery, near Gateshead, about 1730 or 1740. Those
works were very successfully carried on for seventy years, when they
gradually declined, and in 1817 were closed. A small portion of the
building is still used as a brown ware pottery. The next manufactory
was built by Mr. Byers, at Newbottle, in the county of Durham, about
1755, where brown and white earthenware still continues to be made.
In 1762, Messrs. Christopher Thompson and John Maling erected works
at North Hilton, in the county of Durham; their successor, Mr. Robert
Maling, in 1817 transferred his operations to the Tyne, where his
descendants still continue the manufacture. St. Anthony’s, Stepney
Bank, and Ouseburn Old Potteries were commenced about the year 1780 or
1790. Messrs. A. Scott & Co. and Messrs. Samuel Moore & Co. erected
potteries at Southwick, near Sunderland, the former in the year 1789,
the latter in 1803. The pottery carried on by Messrs. John Dawson
& Co., at South Hylton, was built by them in 1800. The works of
Messrs. John Carr & Sons, at North, Shields, were erected in 1814.
Messrs. Thomas Fell & Co. built St. Peter’s Pottery in 1817. The
establishment of Messrs. Skinner & Co., Stockton-on-Tees, dates from
1824. There are now about twenty-five potteries in this district, of
which, on the Tyne, six manufacture white and printed wares, four
white, printed, and brown wares, and three brown ware only, employing
1,200 people, and manufacturing yearly about 12,000 tons of white
clay and 3,000 tons of brown clay, and consuming in the process of
manufacture about 34,000 tons of coals. On the Wear there are two
potteries manufacturing white and printed wares, two white, printed,
and brown wares, and two brown ware only, employing about 500 people,
manufacturing yearly about 4,000 tons of white clay, 1,500 tons of
brown clay, and consuming in the manufacture about 14,000 tons of
coals. On the Tees there are four potteries manufacturing white and
printed wares, employing 500 people, manufacturing 5,000 tons of white
clay and consuming 13,000 tons of coals. Two potteries at Norton
manufacture brown wares; the particulars of their operations the author
has not been able to obtain. The potteries in this district, being
situated upon navigable rivers, have great advantages over their inland
competitors, Staffordshire and Yorkshire. The expenses on clay from
sea freight and inland carriage average 13s. per ton to Staffordshire,
and 5s. per ton to this district; and in flints the advantage is still
greater, in Staffordshire the average being 19s. per ton against 4s.
6d. per ton here. Coals, although a little dearer here per ton, are
so much superior in quality that 80 tons of Newcastle coals are equal
to 100 tons of Yorkshire or Staffordshire coals. About 1858 Messrs.
Skinner & Co., of Stockton-on-Tees, first applied Needham & Kite’s
patent filtering press for expelling the surplus water from the slip,
which had formerly been done by evaporation. This is a much cleaner
and better process than the old system, and is now adopted by thirty
or forty potteries in England and Scotland. With the exception of
three potteries in this district and at Glasgow, machinery has been
very little applied to the manufacture of earthenware, and even at
these works not nearly to the extent to which it is capable of being
profitably adopted. One manufactory on the Tyne, Ford Pottery, having
the best machinery, supplies at least 80 per cent. of the jars used by
confectioners for marmalade and jam, &c., in England and Scotland. The
description of goods manufactured in this district is that used by the
middle and working classes, no first class goods being made here. The
principal markets, in addition to the local trade, are the Danish,
Norwegian, German, Mediterranean, and London, for exportation to the
colonies. The trade to the United States being so very small from here,
the American war has affected this district less than any other.”

The potteries of the Tyne are:--


                         NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE.

_Warburton Pottery_ was established about 1730; its site was on
Pandon Dean, Newcastle-on-Tyne. Coarse ware was, I believe, its only
product. It was removed between 1740 and 1750 to Carr’s Hill, Gateshead
(which see).

       *       *       *       *       *

_Newcastle Pottery_, or _Forth Banks Pottery_, commenced operations
about 1800, by Messrs. Addison and Falconer. Some years after it
passed into the occupation of Messrs. Redhead, Wilson, and Co., then
Messrs. Wallace and Co., who now make only brown ware, but formerly
manufactured white and printed ware also.


                             STEPNEY BANK.

The _Stepney Bank Pottery_ was established about 1780 or 1790, for
the production of the common earthenware. In 1801 it was occupied by
Messrs. Head and Dalton; in 1816 by Messrs. Dryden, Coxon, and Basket;
in 1822 by Messrs. Davies, Coxon, and Wilson; in 1833 by Messrs.
Dalton and Burn, who were succeeded by Mr. G. R. Turnbull, by whom the
character of the ware was considerably improved. About 1872 the works
passed into the hands of Mr. John Wood, who produces both white and
brown ware.


                               OUSEBURN.

_Ouseburn Bridge Pottery_ was commenced in 1817, by Mr. Robert Maling
(see North Hylton Pottery), who manufactured white and printed ware
chiefly for the Dutch market. He was succeeded, in 1853, by his son,
C. T. Maling, who in 1859 built Ford Pottery, and discontinued his old
works. They were re-opened under the name of the Albion Pottery, by
Bell Brothers, about 1863; next by Atkinson and Galloway, and lastly by
Mr. W. Morris, and were finally closed in 1872.

_Ford Pottery._--This pottery was built in 1859 by Mr. Christopher T.
Maling, son of Mr. Robert Maling, who, in 1817, had removed the Hylton
pottery[1] to Newcastle. The works were erected for the purpose of
manufacturing by machinery the various goods produced by Mr. Maling,
the main bulk of which are marmalade, jam, and extract-of-beef pots.
These are of a very fine and compact white body, with an excellent
glaze made from borax without any lead; and it is said that at least
95 per cent. of these pots used by wholesale manufacturers in Great
Britain are made at this establishment. The pots being entirely made
by machinery are necessarily much more uniform in size and weight and
thickness than those produced by any other process, and these, as well
as the excellence of body and glaze, are advantages which have been
appreciated. The mark used is simply the name or MALING impressed in
the clay, [image MALING]with, sometimes, the initial of the house for
whom they are made, as for “Keiller,” and so on.[image MALING and K]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Ouseburn Pottery_ was built about the same date as Stepney Bank
Pottery, by Mr. Yellowley, who was succeeded by Messrs. T. and J.
Thompson, then by Mr. I. Maling; it was finally closed about 1864.
White, printed, and brown ware were its productions.

       *       *       *       *       *

Another _“Ouseburn Pottery”_ was established, at the latter end of
last or the early part of the present century, by Mr. Ralph Charlton,
who carried on the business on a small scale for the manufacture of
brown ware. On his death he was succeeded by his son, John Charlton,
who after a few years gave up the business, and was succeeded by Mr.
George Gray who, or his predecessor, enlarged the kilns, &c. Mr. Gray
was succeeded in the business by Messrs. Morrow and Parker, from
whose hands it passed into those of Mr. Rogers, who erected another
kiln and otherwise extended the buildings. It was next worked by Mr.
William Blakey, who held it until 1860, when it passed into the hands
of Messrs. Robert Martin and Co., who still continue the business. The
goods made are brown ware, and brown ware lined with white, in all the
usual classes of domestic vessels.

Another “Ouseburn Pottery,” established some years ago, passed in 1860
into the hands of Mr. John Hedley Walker. Its productions are plain
and ornamented flower-pots, chimney-pots, and horticultural vessels of
various kinds, as well as the lead-pots and lead-dishes which are so
extensively used in the lead works of the district.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Low Pottery_, identical with the Ouseburn Pottery, now
discontinued, was carried on by Messrs. Thompson Brothers, for the
manufacture of white and Sunderland wares.

       *       *       *       *       *

_South Shore Pottery._--Now discontinued.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Phœnix Pottery_ was built by John Dryden and Co., about 1821,
for the manufacture of brown ware. White and printed ware were made
afterwards. About 1844, it passed into the hands of Messrs. Isaac Bell
and Co. for a short time; it was afterwards purchased and carried
on by Messrs. Carr and Patton (who at same time had North Shields
Pottery); it was then carried on by Mr. John Patton; next by Messrs.
Cook Brothers, who discontinued manufacturing earthenware in 1860, and
converted the premises into a Chemical Factory.

Mr. John Charlton had also a small manufactory in the Ouseburn.

       *       *       *       *       *

_St. Peter’s Pottery_ was established in 1817 by Messrs. Thomas Fell
and Thomas Bell under the style of “Thomas Fell & Co.,” by whom it
was carried on until 1869, when it became a limited liability company
under the same title; the shareholders being the descendants of the
original proprietors. The productions are still, as they have always
been, the ordinary classes of common earthenware, in white, printed,
and sponged varieties. The mark was formerly an anchor with the letter
_F_ [anchor] (for “Fell”) on one side, and the workman’s mark or number
on the other, impressed in the body of the ware. Later on this mark was
discontinued, and the name FELL substituted. Under the company only
printed ware is marked, and that bears the name FELL & Co.

       *       *       *       *       *

_St. Anthony’s Pottery._--This is one of the oldest potteries for
fine ware on the Tyne, being established about 1780, but nothing is
known as to its earlier history. In 1803 or 1804 it passed into the
hands of a Mr. Sewell, in whose family it has continued to the present
day, under the styles of “Sewell & Donkin,” and “Sewell & Co.” The
following particulars were furnished to me by the aged manager of the
works, Mr. T. T. Stevenson:--

   “I cannot go back to say when first begun as a Small White and
   Common Brown Ware Works, but about 1803 or 1804 it was taken
   by the Sewells, and gradually extended by them for Home trade
   until 1814 or 1815, when a considerable addition was made to
   manufacture entirely for exportation, chiefly _C.C._ or Cream
   Coloured, Painted, and Blue Printed, and when I came to the
   Works in 1819, the description of ware then produced say about
   five Gloss Ovens and two or three Enamel Kilns per week, say
   C.C. and best Cream Colour to _imitate Wedgwood’s_ Table Ware
   then made in considerable quantities for Holland and other
   Continental markets, all kinds of Biscuit Painted, Printed very
   dark engraved patterns, also Stamping with _Glue_, and Printing
   on the Glaze from Wood Engravings, also with _Glue_, I believe
   the first that was done in this way, Gold and Silver lustre,
   &c. So it has been continued up to the present period by the
   Sewell family; but latterly not doing so much business, owing
   to a change of partnership, and is at present in the market for
   sale since the death of Mr. Henry Sewell, the natural son of the
   late Joseph Sewell, who was the Potter for nearly sixty years,
   and was a noble specimen of a good master and the old English
   gentleman.”

The fact of printing on pottery from _wood_ engravings, being practised
at these works, is highly interesting, as I have been enabled to
ascertain that engravings by Bewick were thus brought into use;
specimens are, however, very rare. In the Museum of Practical Geology
are examples of St. Anthony’s ware; they bear the marks--

    SEWELL
    SEWELL & DONKIN
    SEWELLS & DONKIN
    SEWELLS & CO.


                              GATESHEAD.

The _Carr’s Hill Pottery_ was the first manufactory for white ware in
the North of England. Painted, enamelled, and brown ware was also made.
It was established about 1750, by a Mr. Warburton, who removed to this
place from Newcastle (see Warburton Pottery), and was successfully
carried on by him and his successors until 1817, when it was closed. A
part of the premises was afterwards carried on by Messrs. Kendall and
Walker, and later still by Messrs. Isaac Fell and Co.


                            SHERRIFF HILL.

_Sherriff Hill Pottery._--These works are carried on by Mr. George
Patterson, as the successor of the firm of Jackson and Patterson. His
chief productions are white ware, which are supplied largely to the
Norwegian Markets.

Messrs. Lewins and Parsons are also stated to have had a pottery here
for the manufacture of the common kinds of earthenware.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Tyne Main Pottery_, on the opposite side of the river to St. Peter’s,
was built by Messrs. R. Davies and Co., in the year 1833, and carried
on by them, manufacturing white, printed, and lustre ware, chiefly for
the Norwegian market. It was closed in 1851. Mr. R. C. Wilson, the
managing partner, then commenced manufacturing at Seaham Harbour.

There was also a pottery at Heworth Shore, carried on by Patterson,
Fordy, and Co. It was closed about 1835.

There was also a pottery at Jarrow for a few years, which manufactured
brown ware only.


                            NORTH SHIELDS.

The “_Low Light Pottery_” was established in 1814, by Mr. Nicholas
Bird, and afterwards passed from him, in or about 1829, to Messrs.
Cornfoot, Colville, and Co. The firm was afterwards changed to
Cornfoot, Patton, and Co., and on the withdrawal of Mr. Cornfoot,
and the addition of Mr. John Carr, the style was changed to that of
“Carr and Patten.” Next the firm was “John Carr and Co.,” and when the
concern became the property of the first of these partners, the late
Mr. John Carr, he and his sons carried it on under the style of “John
Carr and Sons.” It is still continued by the same family under that
style. Originally brown and black wares of the usual common kinds were
made, in addition to the ordinary earthenware, but in 1856 these were
discontinued, and the ordinary white earthenware in cream coloured,
printed, painted, and lustred varieties substituted; these are the
only productions of the firm. These goods are exported principally to
the Mediterranean ports and to Alexandria, for transport to Cairo, and
by the Red Sea to Bombay, &c. It is for these markets that the goods
are mainly manufactured. In brown ware, common mugs, butter-jars,
pancheons, milk-pans, &c., were produced; and in black ware, Egyptian
black and smeared tea-pots, cream ewers, and other articles were
produced. The mark, which, however, has been but seldom used, is a
stag’s head.


                            SOUTH SHIELDS.

The _Tyne_ or _Shields Pottery_ was established about 1830, by a Mr.
Robertson, from whom, about 1845, it passed into the hands of Mr. John
Armstrong; by whom the works were considerably enlarged. In 1871 the
concern was purchased by Messrs. Isaac Fell and George Shields Young,
by whom it is still carried on under the style of “Isaac Fell and Co.”
The goods manufactured are “Sunderland” and “brown” wares, of which
large quantities are shipped for the Continent, as well as supplied
to the London, Scottish, and other home markets. The goods are, as
usual, made from the common brick clay, and after drying are lined
inside with white slip; and they are glazed with lead glaze. The “Tyne
Pottery” is, with the exception of the works of Messrs. Harwood, at
Stockton-on-Tees, the largest in the district for this kind of pottery.

The Potteries of the Wear are:--


                             NORTH HYLTON.

A pottery was established here in 1762, by Messrs. Christopher
Thompson and John Maling, for the manufacture of the ordinary brown
and white earthenware for the home trade, and also for France: the
first printed ware made in the North of England was manufactured here.
The works were also celebrated for their enamel and lustre wares. In
1817 their successor, Mr. Robert Maling, removed his works from Hylton
to the neighbourhood of Newcastle-on-Tyne, where he manufactured
principally for the Dutch markets. They were afterwards carried on by
Dixon, Austin, Phillips, and Co., who at the same time carried on the
Sunderland Pottery (which see).

In the Mayer Museum is an excellent example of this lustre ware. It
is a large jug, of creamy-white earthenware, very light, ornamented
with purple lustre in wavy lines, &c. On one side of the jug is an
engraved and coloured view of the iron bridge over the river Wear,
and underneath it (engraved and transferred from the same plate)
in three small ovals, with borders, &c., are the inscriptions:--“A
South-East View of the Iron Bridge over the Wear, near Sunderland.
Foundation-stone laid by R. Burdon, Esq., September 24th, 1795.
Opened, August 9th, 1796. Nil Desperandum. Auspice Deo.” “Cast Iron,
214 tons; Wrought do., 40.” “Height, 100 feet; Span, 256.” “J.
PHILLIPS, HYLTON POTTERY.” On the other side of the jug is another
engraving, having in its centre a tree, on one side of which, in the
distance, is a ship, and on the other a public-house. In the foreground
of the ship side of the tree is a sailor; and on the other a woman with
hat and feathers, an umbrella, and a little dog. Underneath are the
words--“Jack on a Cruise. ‘Avast there! Back your maintopsail.’” In
front of the jug, beneath the spout, in an oval, occurs the verse:--


                           “REST IN HEAVEN.

    “There is an hour of peaceful rest
    To mourning wanderers given;
    There’s a tear for souls distrest,
    A balm for every wounded breast--
    ’Tis found above in Heaven.”

In my own collection is another example of this white ware with purple
“lustre-splash” ornament. On one side is an engraving, in an oval, of
the same bridge; and around the oval the inscription--“A West View of
the Cast Iron Bridge over the River Wear; built by R. Burdon, Esq.
Span, 236 feet; height, 100 feet. Begun, 24 Sept., 1795. Opened, 9
Aug., 1796.” On the other side, a ship in full sail. Another example
is a punch-bowl. Like the others, it is decorated with purple lustre,
and with views, ships, and verses in transfer-printing. On the bottom,
inside, is a similar view of the Wear bridge to the one just described,
in an oval, with the same inscription. The inside is divided into three
compartments, in one of which is a ship in full sail, with the words--

    “May Peace and Plenty
      On our nation smile,
    And Trade and Commerce
      Bless the British Isle.”

in another, in a border of flowers, surmounted by a small ship, is this
verse:--

    “Glide on, my bark, the summer’s tide
    Is gently flowing by thy side;
    Around thy prow the waters bright,
    In circling rounds of broken light,
    Are glittering as if ocean gave
    Her countless gems to deck the wave.”

and on the third, is a similar border:--


                          “THE SAILOR’S TEAR.

    “He leap’d into the boat,
      As it lay upon the strand,
    But, oh! his heart was far away
      With friends upon the land;
    He thought of those he lov’d the best,
      A wife and infant dear;
    And feeling fill’d the sailor’s breast,
      The sailor’s eye--a tear.”

On the outside, are also three engravings. The first is a ship in full
sail; the next a border of flowers with a small “world” at top, with
the verse:--

    “This is a good world to live in,
    To lend, or to spend, or to give in,
    But to beg or to borrow,
    Or to get a man’s own,
    It is such a world
    As never was known.”

and the third has a border of flowers and the verse:--

    “The loss of gold is great,
    The loss of health is more.
    But losing Christ is such a loss
    As no man can restore.”


                     SOUTH HYLTON OR FORD POTTERY.

The works of Messrs. John Dawson & Co. were erected by them in 1800,
and were carried on by the firm until 1864, when, on the death of the
last of the family, Mr. Charles Dawson, they were closed and converted
into bottle houses; these were destroyed by fire. The flint mill was
taken by Mr. Ball, of the Deptford Pottery, who grinds large quantities
of flint for both home consumption and export. The mark was simply
the name “DAWSON” impressed in the ware. A part of the premises were,
several years afterwards, used as a brown ware manufactory, and later
still by Messrs. Isaac Fell and Co.


                              SOUTHWICK.

The _Southwick Pottery_ was built in 1788, by Mr. Anthony Scott, who
had, previously to that time, carried on a small potwork at Newbottle,
and it is still the property of one of his descendants, Mr. Anthony
Scott, and is carried on by that family, under the style of “Scott
Brothers and Co.” At these works, which are among the most successful
in the district, and where especial care is taken as to quality of the
productions, the usual classes of white, coloured and brown earthenware
are produced. In these works upwards of 150 “hands” are employed. The
goods are made for foreign markets, the greater part being exported to
Denmark and Germany. Messrs. Scott Brothers and Co., of these works,
stand--and deservedly so--high in the scale of manufacturers, and their
goods, whether of the finer or of the commoner classes, are in good
repute, and are well calculated for an extensive home trade.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Wear Pottery_, founded by Messrs. Brunton & Co., in 1803, and soon
after carried on by Messrs. Samuel Moore & Co., passed, about 1861,
into the hands of its present proprietor, Mr. Robert Thomas Wilkinson,
by whom it is carried on under the style of “Samuel Moore & Co.” The
goods manufactured are the ordinary descriptions of white, sponged, and
printed earthenware, and also brown ware, for the English, German, and
Danish markets.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _High Southwick Pottery_, for Sunderland ware, is carried on by Mr.
Thomas Snowball.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Deptford Pottery._--These works were established at Diamond Hall, in
1857, by Mr. Wm. Ball for the manufacture of flower-pots, in which he
effected many important improvements, one of the principal of which is
the “making them hollow footed, or with concave bottoms, with apertures
for drainage and air, and kept free from the attacks of worms. This
gives them a superiority over most, and has gained an extensive
patronage.” In 1863 the manufacture of “Sunderland Ware”--glazed brown
earthenware lined with white--was introduced, and is carried on very
largely for the London and Scottish markets. At these works, too,
suspenders, highly decorated, and other flower vases, seed-boxes, &c.,
are extensively made. Machinery has lately been introduced which very
much facilitates the manufacture of the ware.


                            MONKWEARMOUTH.

The _Sheepfold Pottery_, for Sunderland ware, is carried on by Messrs.
T. J. Rickaby & Co.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Sunderland Pottery_ or the _Garrison Pottery_, also established
by Mr. Phillips, and carried on by Dixon, Austin, Phillips, and Co.,
produced white and Queen’s ware, in all the usual variety of articles.
Sponged, printed, painted, and lustred earthenware were also produced.
The works are now discontinued. The marks were

                            PHILLIPS & CO.

                           _Phillips & Co._

                            PHILLIPS & CO.
                           SUNDERLAND, 1813

                            PHILLIPS & CO.
                          SUNDERLAND POTTERY.

In the Mayer collection is a well-painted quart mug, with allegorical
group of the arts, with the name “W. DIXON, 1811,” pencilled on the
bottom. Among other examples in the Jermyn Street Museum are a printed
coloured and lustred jug, bearing on one side the common view of the
bridge over the Wear, and on the other the Farmers’ Arms, while in
front are the words--“Forget me not,” within a wreath. It bears the
name DIXON AUSTIN & CO., SUNDERLAND. Figures were also produced, and
marked examples may be seen in the same museum. The name occurs in
various ways beyond those just given. Thus, among others, are “_W.
Dixon_,” “_Dixon & Co._,” “_Dixon & Co., Sunderland Pottery_,”

                           DIXON AUSTIN & CO
                         _Sunderland Pottery_

                              DIXON & CO
                          Sunderland Pottery

                              DIXON & CO
                              SUNDERLAND


                            SEAHAM HARBOUR.

A manufactory was built here about the year 1836 for the manufacture of
brown ware by Captain Plowright, of Lynn, and in 1838 it was altered
into a white and printed ware manufactory, by a number of workmen from
Messrs. Dawson and Co., of Hylton; it was closed about the year 1841,
and re-opened in 1851, by Mr. R. C. Wilson, and finally closed in 1852.


                              NEWBOTTLE.

These works were founded about 1755, by Mr. Byers, and he manufactured
both brown and white wares. They passed into the hands of Mr. Anthony
Scott, who carried them on until 1788 (see “Southwick”). They are now
discontinued. A pottery for the manufacture of common brown ware, and
flower-pots, &c., was also carried on by Messrs. Broderick, but is now
discontinued.


                           BISHOP AUCKLAND.

_New Moor Pottery_, at Evenwood, carried on by Mr. George Snowdon for
the manufacture of brown ware.

The potteries of the Tees are:--


                           STOCKTON-ON-TEES.

_Stafford Pottery._--Several earthenware manufactories have been
carried on at this place, and, at the present day, there are four
pot-works in operation, at each of which a considerable number of
hands are employed. The largest, called the “Stafford Pottery,” at
South Stockton, or Thornaby, was established, in 1825, by Mr. William
Smith, a builder of Stockton, for the manufacture of the ordinary brown
ware. Determining shortly afterwards to add the general earthenware to
its productions, he visited Staffordshire, and engaged and ultimately
took into partnership Mr. John Whalley, a Staffordshire potter of
considerable skill, to carry on the work. The firm commenced, under
the style of “William Smith & Co.” in January, 1826. In 1829, in order
further to extend the concern and increase its capital, a partnership
was entered into with Messrs. William and George Skinner, sons of Mr.
Skinner, banker, of Stockton, and continued for some years, when Mr.
George Skinner having purchased the interest of his brother, and of
Mr. William Smith, changed the name of the firm to that of “George
Skinner & Co.” By Mr. George Skinner and Mr. Whalley it was carried on
for some years, when the latter retired, and the management devolved
on Mr. Ambrose Walker, who, shortly after the death of Mr. Skinner
in April, 1870, succeeded to the business, and still carries it on
in connection with the executors of Mr. Skinner under the style of
“Skinner and Walker.” Mr. Walker is a native of Hanley, and in 1837,
when a boy, came to Stockton with his father, who at that time entered
the service of Messrs. Smith & Co. In 1843 he became junior clerk, and
was instructed in the art of potting by Mr. Whalley, who subsequently
transferred to him his valuable receipts.

It is worthy of remark that at these works for many years past, no
thrower is employed; this important branch of the art being entirely
superseded by machinery, for the application of which to potting the
firm has acquired a high reputation.

The goods manufactured were principally “Queen’s ware;” a fine white
earthenware; and a fine brown ware, which were shipped in large
quantities for Belgium, Holland, and some parts of Germany. I am
also informed that the firm at one time established a branch pottery
at Genappes, near Mons, in Belgium, sending workmen from Stockton;
and that the manufactory there was carried on under the style, of
“Capperman & Co.” One mark is--

                              W. S. & CO.
                             QUEEN’S WARE.
                               STOCKTON.

impressed in the body. Other examples have simply the words

                               STOCKTON.

or

                                S. & W.
                             QUEEN’S WARE.
                               STOCKTON.

or the same, without the initials impressed upon them.

In 1848 the firm consisted of William Smith, John Whalley, George
Skinner, and Henry Cowap, and in that year an injunction was granted
restraining them from using, as they had illegally done, the name of
“WEDGWOOD & CO.” or “WEDGEWOOD,” stamped or otherwise marked on goods
produced by them. The following is the official notification of this
matter, which I here reprint from my “Life of Wedgwood:”

                             “Vice-Chancellor of England’s Court,
                                    “Lincoln’s Inn, 8th August, 1848.

                             “IN CHANCERY.

          “_Wedgwood and others_ against _Smith and others_.

   “MR. BETHELL on behalf of the Plaintiffs, Francis Wedgwood
   and Robert Brown (who carry on the business of Potters, at
   Etruria, in the Staffordshire Potteries, under the Firm of
   ‘Josiah Wedgwood and Sons’), moved for an Injunction against
   the defendants, William Smith, John Whalley, George Skinner,
   and Henry Cowap (who also carry on the business of Potters, at
   Stockton, in the County of Durham, under the firm of ‘William
   Smith and Company’), to restrain them and every of them, their
   Agents, Workmen, or Servants, from stamping, or engraving,
   or marking, or in any way putting or placing on the Ware
   manufactured by them, the Defendants, the name ‘Wedgwood’ or
   ‘Wedgewood,’ and from in any manner imitating or counterfeiting
   such name on the Ware manufactured by the Defendants since the
   month of December, 1846, or hereafter to be manufactured by the
   Defendants, with the name ‘Wedgwood’ or ‘Wedgewood,’ stamped,
   engraved, or otherwise marked or placed thereon. M‘r. Bethell
   stated that the trade mark ‘Wedgwood’ had been used by the
   family of the Wedgwoods for centuries; he would not, however, go
   further into the matter at present, because Mr. Parker appeared
   for the Defendants, and it might become necessary--with whom,
   and himself, it had been arranged by consent on Mr. Parker’s
   application on behalf of the Defendants, for time to answer
   the Plaintiffs’ Affidavits--that the Motion should stand over
   until the Second Seal in Michaelmas Term next; and that in the
   meantime the Defendants should be restrained as above stated;
   except that for the words, ‘since the month of December,
   1846,’ the words, ‘since the month of July, 1847,’ should be
   substituted. Mr. J. Parker said he appeared for the Defendants,
   and consented without prejudice; and on his application for time
   to answer the Plaintiff’s Affidavits, the Court made an order
   accordingly.

   “On the 9th day of November, being the Second Seal in Michaelmas
   term, 1848, Mr. E. Younge, as counsel for the above-named
   Plaintiffs, moved for, and obtained, a perpetual Injunction
   against the Defendants in the Terms of Mr. Bethell’s Motion,
   substituting for the words, ‘since the month of December, 1846,’
   the words, ‘since the month of July, 1874;’ the Defendants
   consenting to pay to the Plaintiffs their costs.

                    “Solicitor for the Plaintiffs,
                                     “SAMUEL KING,
                                         “Furnival’s Inn, Middlesex.”

In 1845, Messrs. George Skinner and John Whalley took out a patent
for “certain improvements in the manufacture of earthenware pastes and
vitreous bodies, and also a new composition and material for the same,
with certain new modes of combination thereof, which improvements,
compositions, and combinations are applicable to the manufacture of
earthenware pastes, vitreous bodies, slabs, tiles, and pavement, and
various other useful and ornamental purposes, and is especially adapted
for grave indicators, hydrant indicators, etc., as it is impervious
to all weather and unaffected by change of atmosphere.” This consists
in “combining chalk or carbonate of lime in union with silica, flint,
or silex.” In the specification seven compositions are given, five
of which are for ware and the other two for glaze. The compositions
for ware are various “combinations of the above substances, and they
contain besides, some or all of the following substances, namely,
Cornwall stone, china clay, ball clay, felspar, helspar, or sulphate
of barytes.” The wares may be tinted with the oxides generally used.
Nos. 1 and 2 compositions do not require glazing; Nos. 3, 4, and 5 can
be glazed with glazes which either do or do not contain lead. In this
patent two glazes without lead are claimed. One of these is made of
felspar and chalk, and the other of chalk, silica, flint, or silex,
Cornwall stone, china clay, ball clay, and felspar, mixed in certain
proportions.


                         NORTH SHORE POTTERY.

The “_North Shore Pottery_” was established about 1840, by Mr. James
Smith, afterwards of Danby Grange, near Yarm, in Yorkshire, and was
carried on by his nephew, Mr. William Smith, Jun. (son of the William
Smith to whom I have alluded as the founder of the “Stafford Pottery”),
under the style of “William Smith, Jun., and Co.” Subsequently to
this the business was carried on successively under the styles of “G.
F. Smith and Co.” and “G. and W. Smith.” A few years ago the senior
partner, Mr. S. P. Smith, retired from the concern, and since then it
has been continued solely by Mr. William Smith, son of the founder and
still present owner of the works.

The classes of goods made at this pottery were both in white and
cream-coloured wares, and some of the examples of the first productions
are of excellent quality. The markets for which, principally, the
“North Shore Pottery” goods were and are made, are, besides the home
trade--which is principally confined to London and the South of
England--Holland, Germany, and Denmark. Large quantities of wares are
also exported to Constantinople, and other Mediterranean markets. The
goods now made are the usual classes of white earthenware, and printed
and coloured goods, in dinner, teas, toilet, and other services; bread,
cheese, and other trays of good design; mugs, jugs, basins, and all the
usual varieties of domestic vessels. In quality they equal the ordinary
classes of Staffordshire ware, and many of the printed patterns
(notably, perhaps, the “Danby”) are of a superior kind. The “sponge
patterns” for foreign markets are extensively used, and green-glazed
ware in flower-pots, &c., are also made.

The impressed mark at the present time is

                                 W. S.
                               Stockton.

The printed marks, besides an ornamental border and the name of the
pattern, bear simply the initials W. S.

Other potteries are Mr. Ainsworth’s, at North Stockton, for white and
printed wares; Mr. Thomas Harwood “The Norton Pottery,” at Norton, for
Sunderland and yellow wares; and Messrs. Harwood Brothers, “_Clarence
Pottery_,” for Sunderland ware.


                        MIDDLESBOROUGH-ON-TEES.

The Middlesborough Pottery was established in 1831; the first oven
being fired in April of that year, and the first order shipped to
Gibraltar in September. They were the first public works established in
Middlesborough. From 1831 to 1844 the firm traded under the style of
“The Middlesborough Pottery Company,” and from that year until 1852 as
“The Middlesborough Earthenware Company.” From 1852 to the present time
the firm has traded under the name of the proprietors as “Messrs. Isaac
Wilson & Co.” The works, with wharf, occupy an area of about 9,702
square yards.

At the first commencement of the works the proprietors directed
their attention to the production of the better classes of ordinary
earthenware for the continental trade, and in the same year in which
the works were started, their present extensive warehouse at Roding’s
Mart, Hamburg, was established. The goods produced are the ordinary
“opaque china,” cream-coloured ware, and lustre enamelled ware in
dinner, tea, and toilet services, and all the general classes of
domestic vessels, enamelled flower pots, bread trays, &c. Some of these
are of very good quality, and the printed services are equal to the
more ordinary Staffordshire goods. The principal impressed marks, used
are the following--

The printed marks indicating the pattern have, in addition to the name
of the pattern (“Convolvulus,” “Trent,” “Nunthorpe,” &c.) the initials
of the firm, as “M. P. & Co.” for “Middlesborough Pottery Company,” and
“I. W. & Co.” for “Isaac Wilson & Co.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_Wolviston Pottery_, now discontinued, formerly produced yellow ware.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Coxhoe Pottery_, also discontinued, produced Sunderland ware.


                               ALNWICK.

There were formerly pot-works here; but no trace of them is now left,
save the name of the street, “Potter Gate,” where they existed. The
former name of this street was, in 1567, “Barresdale Street,” but
potters having there located themselves, it became gradually changed.
Another old street in this town now known as “Clayport,” was formerly
called “Clay-peth,” _peth_ being a provincialism for a steep road,
and _clay_ the nature of the soil; probably it was this clay that the
Alnwick potters turned to good account.




                              CHAPTER II.

   Liverpool Pottery--Shaw’s Delft Ware--Shaw’s Brow--Zachariah
   Barnes--Sadler and Green--Transfer Printing--Wedgwood’s
   Printed Ware--Drinkwater’s Works--Spencer’s Pottery--Richard
   Chaffers--Reid and Co.’s Works--The Penningtons--Patrick’s Hill
   Works--The Flint Pottery--Herculaneum Works--Warrington Pottery
   and China--Runcorn--Prescot--St. Helen’s--Seacombe.


                              LIVERPOOL.

It would, perhaps, scarcely be expected that in such a busy,
bustling, and gigantic place of enterprise and commercial activity
as Liverpool--in the midst of shipping of every description, and
surrounded by the most enormous and busy undertakings of one kind
or other--we should successfully look for the full and perfect
accomplishment of so quiet, so unostentatious, so peaceful, and so
delicate an art as that of the potter. But thus it is; and Liverpool,
which counts its docks by tens, its wharves and stores by hundreds, its
shipping by thousands, and its wealth by millions--which can boast its
half-million inhabitants, its overground and under-ground railways,
and every appliance which skill and enterprise can give or trade and
commerce possibly require--which has undertaken the accomplishment of
some of the most wonderful and gigantic schemes the world ever knew,
and has carried them out in that spirit of commendable and boundless
energy that invariably characterises all its actions--has not been
behindhand with its more inland and more modest neighbours in the
manufacture of delicate porcelain, and of pottery of the most fragile
nature.

It is more than probable that in mediæval times the coarse ware of the
period--the pitchers, porringers, dishes, &c.--was made on the banks of
the Mersey. The first mention of pottery, however, occurs in 1674, when
the following items appear in the list of town dues:--

   “For every cart-load of muggs (shipped) into foreign ports,
   6_d._ For every cart-load of muggs along the coasts, 4_d._ For
   every crate of cupps or pipes into foreign ports, 2_d._ For
   every crate of cupps or pipes along the coast, 1_d._”

  [Illustration: A WEST PROSPECT OF GREAT CROSBY 1716

  Fig. 1.]

_Shaw’s Delft Ware Works._--The earliest potwork of which there
is any reliable information, appears to have been that of Alderman
Shaw, situated at Shaw’s Brow, which afterwards became a complete
nest of pot-works belonging to different individuals. At these works
was most probably made the earliest known dated example of Liverpool
delft ware. This is a large oblong-square plaque, unique in its size
and decoration, which is preserved in the Mayer museum, and is shown
on Fig. 1. It is of fine delft ware, flat in surface, and measures 2
feet 7 inches in length, by 1 foot 8 inches in depth, and is nearly
three quarters of an inch in thickness. The body is composed of the
ordinary buff-coloured clay, smeared, like what are usually called
“Dutch tiles,” on the face with a fine white clay, on which the design
is drawn in blue, and then glazed. The plaque represents the village
of Great Crosby as seen from the river Mersey, and bears the name and
date, “A WEST PROSPECT OF GREAT CROSBY, 1716,” on a ribbon at
the top. In the foreground is the river Mersey, with ships and brigs,
and a sloop and a schooner. The large ship in the centre of the picture
has a boat attached to her stern, and another boat containing two
men is seen rowing towards her, while on the water around them are a
number of gulls and other sea-birds. On the sandy banks of the river
are several figures, consisting of a woman with a basket on her arm,
apparently looking across the river; another woman, also with a basket
on her arm, walking with a long stick; a man also walking with a stick;
a gentleman on horseback; and a man driving an ass before him. Beyond
these figures rise the sandbanks, covered with long grass and heather,
in which is a rabbit warren. The warren keeper’s house is shown, as
are also numbers of rabbits. Beyond this again, in the open space,
are a number of figures: men are seen galloping on horseback; women
are carrying baskets; men are walking about, some with dogs, others
without; and the intermediate space is pretty well studded with cattle,
rabbits, and birds; a milkmaid milking one of the cows. Behind this,
again, the ground is divided by hedgerows into fields, in which are
cattle, people walking to and fro, and a milkmaid carrying a milkpail
on her head. In the background is the town of Great Crosby, including
the school-house and numerous other buildings, with long rows of trees,
palings, gates, and other objects incidental to the scene. To the left
of the spectator is Crosby windmill, still standing; and those who are
best acquainted with the aspect of the place, as seen from the river
at the present day, say that little alteration has taken place in the
village; that this view, taken a hundred and fifty years ago, might
well pass for one just executed.

  [Illustration:

    Concordia Parua Res Crescunt

    THIS SEAT WAS ERECTED BY
    JOHN HARRISON AND
    HENRY HARRISON OF
    LEVERPOOLE 1722

  Fig. 2.]

Another plaque, Fig. 2, is of a few years later date, 1722. It is
affixed to the wall over one of the seats of old Crosby Church, and
bears the arms of the Merchant Taylors’ Company, viz., _argent_, a
royal tent between two parliament robes, _gules_, lined _ermine_;
on a chief _azure_, a lion of England; crest, a Holy Lamb in glory,
_proper_; supporters, two camels, _or_; motto, “_Concordia parvæ
res crescunt._” Below is the inscription--“THIS SEAT WAS ERECTED BY
JOHN HARRISON AND HENRY HARRISON, OF LEVERPOOLE, 1722.” This plaque
measures sixteen inches on each side, and is nearly an inch and a half
in thickness. It is of precisely the same kind of ware as the view of
Crosby, and was doubtless the production of the same establishment.
John and Henry Harrison are said to have been natives of Crosby, the
grammar school of which village they erected and endowed, after having
made large fortunes as merchants in London, the trust being held by
the Company of Merchant Taylors. Mr. Mayer mentions that another of
these curious plaques, or slabs, was attached to the front of a house
at Newton-cum-Larten. It was circular, and bore the arms of Johnson
and Anton impaled, with the date 1753. The Mr. Johnson whose armorial
bearings it represents, was afterwards Mayor of Liverpool, and formed
St. James’s Walk. He married Miss Anton, an heiress, and built the
house where the slab was affixed, and which is believed to have been
made and presented to him for that purpose by his brother alderman, Mr.
Shaw, the potter. Another dated example is a mug in the Mayer museum
shown on the accompanying engraving. It is decorated with borders in
blue and black, and bears on its front the initials and date

                                   P
                                 I · R
                                 1728

  [Illustration: Fig. 3.]

There were, it appears, two potters, at least, of the name of
Shaw--Samuel Shaw, who died in October, 1775, and Thomas Shaw, who,
I believe, was his son. The works were, as I have stated, at a place
which, from that circumstance, took the name of Shaw’s Brow, a rising
piece of ground on the east side of the rivulet that ran at the bottom
of Dale Street. Here the early pot-works were established, and here
in after years they increased, until the whole “Brow” became one mass
of potter’s banks, with houses for the workmen on both sides of the
street; and so numerous were they that, according to the census taken
in 1790, there were as many as 74 houses, occupied by 374 persons,
the whole of whom were connected with the potteries. At these works,
Richard Chaffers, to whom credit is due for the advances he made in the
manufacture of porcelain, was apprenticed to Shaw, and on the Brow he
established his own manufactory. In 1754 the following very interesting
little notice of these pot-works occurs in “The Liverpool Memorandum
Book:”--

   “The chief manufactures carried on here are blue and white
   earthenware, which at present almost vie with China. Large
   quantities are exported for the colonies abroad.”

  [Illustration: Fig. 4.]

Of about this period are some examples in the Mayer museum. Fig.
4 is a magnificent punch-bowl, measuring 17½ inches in diameter,
and of proportionate depth. It is of the ordinary Delft ware; its
decorations painted in blue. At the bottom of the bowl, inside, is
a fine painting of a three-masted ship, in full sail, with streamer
flying at the mast-head, the Union Jack at the jib, and a lion for a
figure-head. This bowl was “made for Captain Metcalfe, who commanded
the _Golden Lion_, which was the first vessel that sailed out of
Liverpool on the whale fishery and Greenland trade, and was presented
to him on his return from his second voyage, by his employers, who
were a company composed of the principal merchants of Liverpool,
in the year 1753.” The size of the bowl, and the excellence of its
decorations and workmanship, show to what perfection Shaw had arrived
in this manufacture. Among other articles besides mugs and punch-bowls,
were char-pots; these, like the rest, are of Delft ware, and usually
decorated with fishes around their outsides. One (Fig. 5) bears the
initials I. B. Figs. 6 and 7 are two mugs, of the same body and glaze
as the plaques already described. The larger one, a quart mug, is
ornamented with flowers, painted in blue, green, and black, and bears
the initials and date T. F. 1757, the initials being those of Thomas
Fazackerley, to whom it was presented by its maker, a workman at Shaw’s
pottery. In 1758, Mr. Fazackerley having married, his friend made the
smaller of the two mugs, a pint one, on which he placed the initials of
the lady, Catherine Fazackerley, and the date C. F. 1758 within an oval
on its front. This mug is decorated with flowers, painted in green,
yellow, and blue. Fig. 8 is one of a pair of cows, 4¾ inches in height;
the upper half of each lifts off. They are excellently modelled, and
painted in flowers, evidently by the same artist as the Fazackerley
mugs, in yellow, blue, and green. Fragments of figures were, I believe,
found in excavating on the site of Shaw’s pottery.

  [Illustration: Fig. 5.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 6 and 7.]

Another dated example of about this period is a fine Delft ware bowl,
on the outside of which are painted birds, butterflies, and flowers,
and on the inside a man-of-war, painted in blue and colours, with the
inscription, “Success to the _Monmouth_, 1760.”

  [Illustration: Fig. 8.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 9 to 12.]

A most interesting matter in connection with the Delft ware works at
Shaw’s Brow is the fact of a number of broken vessels being discovered
on its site during excavations for building the Liverpool Free Library
and Museum, in 1857. On that occasion an old slip-vat was found
containing clay, which might probably have been prepared as early as
1680. The clay was of the common coarse kind, the same as the general
body of Delft ware. Of this clay so discovered Mr. Mayer had a vase
thrown and fired. Some of the Delft cups, &c., exhumed are shown on
Figs. 9 to 14. These are all of a pinkish white; one only having a
pattern painted in blue. Another example of Delft ware (Fig. 15), said
to be of Liverpool make, in Mr. Mayer’s collection, is one of a pair of
flower vases, of good design, with heads at the sides, and elaborately
painted in blue. It is marked on the bottom--

                                   W
                                 D   A

in blue. Another example (Fig. 16), said to be of Liverpool make, is
the puzzle jug, and bears the very appropriate motto, painted in blue--

    “Here, Gentlemen, come try y^r skill,
    I’ll hold a wager, if you will,
    That you Don’t Drink this liq^{r} all
    Without you spill or lett some Fall.”

_Zachariah Barnes._--another maker of Delft ware in Liverpool--was
a native of Warrington, and brother to Dr. Barnes, of Manchester. He
was born in 1743, and having learned the “art, mystery, and occupation”
of throwing, &c., commenced business as a potter in the old Haymarket,
at the left-hand side in going to Byrom Street. He is said to have
first made China, but afterwards turned his attention to Delft ware,
and soon became proficient in the art. The principal varieties of goods
made by him were jars and pots for druggists; large dishes, octagonal
plates and dishes for dinner services; “Dutch tiles;” labels for
liquors; potted-fish pots, &c., &c. Of the druggist’s jars, of which
he made considerable quantities, it is said that the labelling in his
time underwent no less than three changes from alterations in the
pharmacopæia.

  [Illustration: Fig. 13.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 14.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 15.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 16.]

The large round dishes made by Barnes were chiefly sent into Wales,
where the simple habits of their forefathers remained unchanged among
the people long after their alteration in England; and the master of
the house and his guest dipped their spoons into the mess and helped
themselves from the dish placed in the middle of the table. Quantities
of this ware were sent to the great border fairs, held at Chester,
whither the inhabitants of the more remote and inaccessible parts of
the mountain districts of Wales assembled to buy their stores for the
year. The quality of this ware was very coarse, without flint, with the
usual Delft-like thick tin glaze. But Barnes’s principal _forte_
lay in the manufacture of square tiles, then much in vogue. When these
tiles were required to be printed, that part of the work was done by
Messrs. Sadler and Green. So large was the sale of this article, that
Mr. Barnes has been heard to say he made a profit of £300 per annum by
his tiles alone, he having a monopoly of the trade. He also made large
quantities of pots for potting char, which were sent to the lakes. The
ovens were fired with turf brought from the bogs at Kirkley, and on the
night of firing, the men were always allowed potatoes to roast at the
kiln fires, and a certain quantity of ale to drink.

  [Illustration: WORMWOOD

  Fig. 17.]

The labels for different kinds of liquors, to which I have just alluded
as being largely made by Barnes, were of various sizes, but generally
of one uniform shape; the one engraved (Fig. 17) being five a and half
inches long. Examples in the Mayer Museum are respectively lettered
for Rum, Cyder, Tent, Brandy, Lisbon, Peppermint, Wormwood, Aniseed,
Geneva, Claret, Spruce, Perry, Orange, Burgundy, Port, Raisin, and
other liquors. They are of the usual common clay in body, faced with
fine white slip and glazed.

  [Illustration: Fig. 18.]

The tiles made by Zachariah Barnes were usually five inches square,
and about a quarter of an inch in thickness, and were used for lining
fire-places, forming chimney-pieces, and other domestic purposes.
Originally, the tiles were painted in the ordinary Delft style,
with patterns of various kinds--flowers, landscapes, ships, groups,
&c.--usually in blue, but sometimes in colours. A _plaque_ of
Liverpool Delft, painted in two or three colours (in the possession of
Mr. Benson Rathbone), is shown on Fig. 18; it represents a bird in a
cage, the perspective of which is more curious than accurate.

_Sadler and Green._--The tiles to which I have alluded bring me to
a very interesting part of the subject of this chapter. I mean the
introduction of _printing_ on earthenware, an invention which has
been attributed to, and claimed by, several places, and which will
yet require further research to entirely determine. At Worcester it
is believed the invention was applied in the year 1756, and it is an
undoubted fact that the art was practised there in the following year,
a dated example of the year 1757 being, happily, in existence.[2] At
Caughley transfer-printing was, as I have already shown, practised at
about the same period. At Battersea, printing on enamels was, it would
seem, carried on at about the same date, or probably somewhat earlier.
At Liverpool it is certain that the art was known at an earlier period
than can with safety be ascribed to Worcester. A fine and exquisitely
sharp specimen of transfer-printing on enamel, dated 1756, is in
Mr. Mayer’s possession. It is curious that these two earliest dated
exemplars of these two candidates for the honour of the invention of
printing on enamels and earthenware, Liverpool and Worcester, should be
portraits of the same individual--Frederick the Great of Prussia. But
so it is. The Worcester example is a mug, bearing the royal portrait
with trophies, &c., and the date 1757; the Liverpool one an oval enamel
(and a much finer work of art), with the name, “J. SADDLER, Liverp^l.
Enam^l.”

The art is said to have been invented by this John Sadler, of
Liverpool, in 1752. In Moss’s “Liverpool Guide,” published in 1790,
it is stated:--“Copper-plate printing upon china and earthenware
originated here in 1752, and remained some time a secret with the
inventors, Messrs. Sadler and Green, the latter of whom still continues
the business in Harrington Street. It appeared unaccountable how uneven
surfaces could receive impressions from copper-plates. It could not,
however, long remain undiscovered that the impression from the plate is
first taken upon paper, and thence communicated to the ware after it
is glazed. The manner in which this continues to be done here remains
still unrivalled in perfection.”

John Sadler, the inventor of this important art, was the son of Adam
Sadler, a favourite soldier of the great Duke of Marlborough, and was
out with that general in the war in the Low Countries. While there, he
lodged in the house of a printer, and thus obtained an insight into the
art of printing. On returning to England, on the accession of George
I., he left the army in disgust and retired to Ulverstone, where he
married a Miss Bibby, who numbered among her acquaintance the daughters
of the Earl of Sefton. Through the influence of these ladies he removed
to Melling, and afterwards leased a house at Aintree. In this lease
he is styled “Adam Sadler, of Melling, gentleman.” The taste he had
acquired in the Low Countries abiding with him, he shortly afterwards,
however, removed to the New Market, Liverpool, where he printed a great
number of books--among which, being himself an excellent musician,
one called “The Muses’ Delight” was with him an especial favourite.
His son, John Sadler, having learned the art of engraving, on the
termination of his apprenticeship bought a house from his father,
in Harrington Street, for the nominal sum of five shillings, and in
that house, in 1748, commenced business on his own account. Here he
married a Miss Elizabeth Parker, daughter of Mr. Parker, watchmaker,
of Seel Street, and soon afterwards became engaged in litigation.
Having got together a good business, his fellow townsmen became jealous
of his success, and the corporation attempted to remove him as not
being a freeman of Liverpool, and therefore having no right to keep
a shop within its boundaries. Disregarding the order of removal, the
corporation commenced an action against him, which he successfully
defended, and showed that the authorities possessed no power of
ejection. This decision was one of great importance to the trading
community, and opened the door to numberless people who commenced
business in the town.

Mr. John Sadler was, according to Mr. Mayer, the first person who
applied the art of printing to the ornamentation of pottery, and the
story of his discovery is thus told:--Sadler had been in the habit
of giving waste and spoiled impressions from his engraved plates to
little children, and these they frequently stuck upon pieces of broken
pot from the pot-works at Shaw’s Brow, for their own amusement, and
for building dolls’ houses. This circumstance gave him the idea of
ornamenting pottery with printed pictures, and, keeping the idea
secret, he experimentalised until he had nearly succeeded, when he
mentioned the circumstance to Guy Green, who had then recently
succeeded Mr. Adam Sadler in his business. Guy Green was a poor boy,
but spent what halfpence he could get in buying ballads at the shop of
Adam Sadler. Sadler liking the lad, who was intelligent beyond his age
or his companions, took him into his service and encouraged him in all
that was honourable. John Sadler having, as I have said, mentioned his
discovery to Guy Green, the two “laid their heads together,” conducted
joint experiments, and having ultimately succeeded, at length entered
into partnership. This done, they determined to apply to the king for a
patent; which, however, under the advice of friends, was not done.

The art was first of all turned to good account in the decoration of
tiles--“Dutch tiles,” as they are usually called--and the following
highly interesting documents relating to them, which are in the
possession of Mr. Mayer, and to whom the antiquarian world is indebted
for first making them public, will be read with interest:--

   “I, John Sadler, of Liverpoole, in the county of Lancaster,
   printer, and Guy Green, of Liverpoole, aforesaid, printer,
   severally maketh oath that on Tuesday, the 27th day of July
   instant, they, these deponents, without the aid or assistance
   of any other person or persons, did within the space of six
   hours, to wit, between the hours of nine in the morning and
   three in the afternoon of the same day, print upwards of twelve
   hundred Earthenware tiles of different patterns, at Liverpoole
   aforesaid, and which, as these deponents have heard and believe,
   were more in number and better and neater than one hundred
   skilful pot-painters could have painted in the like space of
   time, in the common and usual way of painting with a pencil;
   and these deponents say that they have been upwards of seven
   years in finding out the method of printing tiles, and in making
   tryals and experiments for that purpose, which they have now
   through great pains and expence brought to perfection.

                                                “JOHN SADLER.,
                                                “GUY GREEN.

   “Taken and sworn at Liverpoole, in the county of Lancaster, the
   second day of August, one thousand seven hundred and fifty-six,
   before William Statham, a Master Extraordinary in Chancery.”

   “We, Alderman Thomas Shaw and Samuel Gilbody, both of
   Liverpoole, in the county of Lancaster, clay potters, whose
   names are hereunto subscribed, do hereby humbly certifye that
   we are well assured that John Sadler and Guy Green did, at
   Liverpoole aforesaid, on Tuesday, the 27th day of July last
   past, within the space of six hours, print upwards of 1,200
   earthenware tiles of different colours and patterns, which is
   upon a moderate computation more than 100 good workmen could
   have done of the same patterns in the same space of time by the
   usual painting with the pencil. That we have since burnt the
   above tiles, and that they are considerably neater than any we
   have seen pencilled, and may be sold at little more than half
   the price. We are also assured the said John Sadler and Guy
   Green have been several years in bringing the art of printing on
   earthenware to perfection, and we never heard it was done by any
   other person or persons but themselves. We are also assured that
   as the Dutch (who import large quantities of tiles into England,
   Ireland, &c.) may by this improvement be considerably undersold,
   it cannot fail to be of great advantage to the nation, and to
   the town of Liverpoole in particular, where the earthenware
   manufacture is more extensively carried on than in any other
   town in the kingdom; and for which reasons we hope and do not
   doubt the above persons will be indulged in their request for a
   patent, to secure to them the profits that may arise from the
   above useful and advantageous improvement.

                                            “THOMAS SHAW,
                                            “SAMUEL GILBODY.”

                                   “Liverpoole, August 13th, 1756.

    “SIR,

   “John Sadler, the bearer, and Guy Green, both of this town, have
   invented a method of printing potters’ earthenware tyles for
   chimneys with surprising expedition. We have seen several of
   their printed tyles, and are of opinion that they are superior
   to any done by the pencil, and that this invention will be
   highly advantageous to the kingdom in generall, and to the town
   of Liverpoole in particular.

   “In consequence of which, and for the encouragement of so useful
   and ingenious an improvement, we desire the favour of your
   interest in procuring for them his Majesty’s letters patent.

                                              “ELLIS CUNCLIFFE,
                                              “SPENCER STEERS,
                                              “CHARLES GOORE.

   “Addressed to Charles Pole, Esq., in London.”

In the Mayer museum are found, among other invaluable treasures, some
enamels on copper bearing impressions from copper-plates transferred
to them, and having the name of “_J. Sadler, Liverp^l, Enam^l_,”
and other examples of enamels and of earthenware with the names of
“_Sadler, Sculp._,” or of “_Green_.” Messrs. Sadler and Green appear
to have done a very profitable and excellent business in the printing
on pottery. The process was soon found to be as applicable to services
and other descriptions of goods as to tiles; and these two enterprising
men produced many fine examples of their art, some of which, bearing
their names as engravers or enamellers, are still in existence. Josiah
Wedgwood, always alive to everything which could tend to improve or
render more commercial the productions of his manufactory, although at
first opposed to the introduction of this invention, as being, in his
opinion, an unsatisfactory and unprofitable substitute for painting,
eventually determined to adopt the new style of ornamentation, and
arranged with the inventors to decorate such of his Queen’s ware as it
would be applicable to, by their process. The work was a troublesome
one, and in the then state of the roads--for it must be remembered that
this was before the time even of canals in the district, much less of
railroads--the communication between Burslem and Liverpool was one
of great difficulty. Wedgwood, however, overcame it, and having made
the plain body at his works in Staffordshire, packed it in waggons
and carts, and even in the panniers of pack-horses, and sent it to
Liverpool, where it was printed by Sadler and Green, and returned to
him by the same kind of conveyance. The works of Sadler and Green were
in Harrington Street, at the back of Lord Street, Liverpool, and here
they not only carried on their engraving and transfer-printing for
other potters, but made their own wares, and carried on an extensive
business. It was here that they printed ware for Josiah Wedgwood. Of
this connection of Wedgwood with the Liverpool works, Mr. Mayer thus
writes:--

   “About this time Josiah Wedgwood was making a complete
   revolution in the art of pottery; and four years after Messrs.
   Sadler and Green’s invention was announced to the world,
   Wedgwood brought out his celebrated Queen’s ware. Dr. Gagerly
   seizing upon the new style of ornamentation invented in
   Liverpool, he immediately made arrangements with the proprietors
   for decorating his hitherto cream-coloured Queen’s ware by their
   process; and accordingly I find him making the plain body at
   Burslem, and sending it in that state to Liverpool by waggon,
   where it was printed, and again returned to him by the same
   conveyance, except in the case of those orders that must go by
   sea, fit for the market. This he continued to do until near the
   time of his death, when we find by invoices in my possession
   that ware was sent to Liverpool and printed by Mr. Guy Green
   as late as 1794. A little before this time, his manufactory
   at Etruria having been made complete in all other branches of
   the art, and the manufacture at Liverpool being much decayed,
   he engaged many of the hands formerly employed there: amongst
   the indentures is the name of John Pennington, son of James
   Pennington, manufacturer of china, dated 1784, to be taught the
   art of engraving in aquatint, and thus he was enabled to execute
   the printing on his own premises in Staffordshire, thereby
   saving the expense of transport to and fro. In proof that Mr.
   Wedgwood did this, I may quote a few passages from letters to
   his partner, Mr. Bentley, in London. He says:--

   “‘1776.--We wrote to Mr. Green in consequence of your letter,
   acquainting that a foreign gentleman wanted a series of ware
   printed with different landskips, but that he would not confirm
   the order without knowing how many different designs of
   landskips we could put upon them.’


   “Mr. Green’s answer is:--

   “‘The patterns for landskips are for every dish a different
   landskip view, &c.; about 30 different designs for table, soup,
   and dessert plates, and a great variety for various purposes of
   tureens, sauce boats, &c.’

   “‘1768.--The cards (address) I intend to have engraved in
   Liverpool, &c.’

   “‘1769.--One crate of printed tea-ware.’

   “On the other hand I find letters from Mr. Green to Mr.
   Wedgwood:--

   “‘1776.--Your Mr. Haywood desires the invoice of a box of
   pattern tiles sent some time ago. As I did not intend to make
   any charge for them, I have no account of the contents. The
   prices I sell them for to the shops are as follows:--For black
   printed tile, 5_s._ per dozen; green vase tile, 4_s._ ditto;
   green ground, 4_s._ ditto; half tiles for borders, 2_s._ 9_d._
   ditto; rose or spotted tiles, 3_s._ 6_d._ ditto, &c.’

   “‘1783.--I have put the tile plate to be engraved as soon as
   I received your order for doing it; but by the neglect of the
   engraver it is not yet finished, but expect it will be completed
   tomorrow.’

   “‘1783.--Our enamel kiln being down prevented us sending the
   goods forward as usual.’

   “‘1783.--The plate with cypher was done here. I think it would
   be best to print the cypher in black, as I am much afraid the
   brown purple that the pattern was done in would not stand an up
   and down heat, as it would change in being long in heating.’

   “‘1783.--For printing a table and tea-service of 250 pieces (D.
   G.) for David Garrick, £8 6_s._ 1½_d._

   “‘1783.--Twenty-five dozen half-tiles printing and colouring, £1
   5_s._’

   “The last invoice I find from Mr. Green is dated

   “‘1793.--I am sorry I cannot make out the invoice you request of
   goods forwarded you, April 4, for want of having received your
   charge of them to me. Only directions for printing these came
   enclosed in the package.’

   “‘1798.--To printing two fruit baskets, 1_s._’

   “This last item, of course, does not imply that Mr. Wedgwood
   had the chief of his work done here, but no doubt the articles
   were required to match some service previously sold, of which
   Mr. Green had possession of the copper plates. In the following
   year Mr. Green retired from business to enjoy the fruits of his
   long and successful labours. The following memorandum, in the
   handwriting of Mr. Sadler (from Mr. Sadler’s receipt-book in my
   possession, date 1776), will give an idea of the extent of their
   business:--

   “J. Sadler and G. Green would be willing to take a young man
   about 18 into partnership for a third of their concern, in the
   printing and enamelling china, earthenware, tile, &c., business,
   on the following conditions:--1st, That he advances his £200 for
   the third part of the engravings and other materials necessary
   for the business (N.B.--The engravings alone have cost above
   £800). 2nd. That he should give his labour and attendance for
   twelve months without any share of the profits, in consideration
   of being instructed completely in the business. 3rd. After the
   expiration of twelve months, the stock in ware should be valued
   as low as is common in such cases, and he should immediately
   enter as a partner into the profits of the whole concern
   throughout, either paying the value for his third share of such
   stock, or paying interest for it till it is cleared off. The
   value of the stock is uncertain, being sometimes £200 more than
   other time; but reckon it at the least may be about £600. The
   sole reason of taking a partner is, J. Sadler not choosing to
   confine himself to business as much as heretofore.”

Specimens of these early printed goods, bearing Wedgwood’s mark, are
rare. The curious teapot (Fig. 19) will serve as an example. It bears
on one side a well-engraved and sharply printed representation of the
quaint subject of the mill to grind old people young again--the kind
of curious machine which one recollects in our boyish days were taken
about from fair to fair by strolling mountebanks--and on the other an
oval border of foliage, containing the ballad belonging to the subject,
called “The Miller’s Maid grinding Old Men Young again.” It begins--

    “Come, old, decrepid, lame, or blind,
    Into my mill to take a grind.”

  [Illustration: Fig. 19.]

The teapot is marked WEDGWOOD. In the possession of Mr. Beard, of
Manchester, is a fine dinner service of the printed “Queen’s ware,”
and other pieces of interest. In the Museum of Practical Geology is an
example of this printing, the design on one side of which is a group at
tea--a lady pouring out tea for a gentleman, and on the opposite side
the verse:--

    “Kindly take this gift of mine,
      The gift and giver I hope is thine;
    And tho’ the value is but small,
      A loving Heart is worth it all.”

Examples of Liverpool made pottery, printed by Sadler and Green, are
also of uncommon occurrence. In the Mayer Museum the best, and indeed
only series worthy the name in existence, is to be found, and to these
wares I direct the attention of all who are interested in the subject.

Of TILES printed by John Sadler and Guy Green, many examples
are in existence--a large number, some bearing their names, being in
Mr. Mayer’s Museum. Of these I also possess examples, and others again
are found in other collections. They are remarkable for the sharpness
of the engraving, the wonderful clearness and beauty of the transfers
(the ink used being evidently far superior to that usually used at the
present day), and excellence of the glazes. They are printed either in
black, green, red, or purple, and the devices are extremely varied.
It is interesting to add, that the same copper-plates which were used
for decorating these Delft ware tiles were used also for ornamenting
mugs, jugs, &c., of finer earthenware. Adam Sadler died on the 7th of
October, 1788, aged eighty-three, and his son, John Sadler, the 10th of
December, 1789, aged sixty-nine, and they were buried at Sefton.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Drinkwater._--Another Delft ware pottery was situated at the bottom
of Duke Street, in a small street which, from that establishment, took
the name which it still retains, of “Pot-House Lane.” These works were
conducted by Mr. George Drinkwater (who was born in the neighbourhood
of Preston), brother to Mr. James Drinkwater, who, in the navy,
acquired considerable riches and honour, and was ancestor of Sir John
Drinkwater. The works were not, however, of very long continuance,
and except they can be authenticated by evidence of descent, &c., the
productions cannot be distinguished from those of the other potteries
of the time. In the Mayer museum are some authenticated specimens of
Drinkwater’s make, among which a large plate, twenty-three inches in
diameter, is the most interesting.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Spencer._--Another potwork of a similar kind was established by a
Mr. Thomas Spencer, at the bottom of Richmond Row. These works were,
however, carried on only for a few years, when Mr. Spencer removed to
the “Moss Pottery,” near Prescot, where he continued to make coarse red
ware for common use.

  [Illustration: Fig. 20.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Chaffers._--One of the most noted men connected with the ceramic art
in Liverpool was Richard Chaffers, who made great advances in that art,
and to whom his native town owed the introduction of the manufacture
of china. He was the son of a shipwright of considerable eminence and
means; was born in Mersey Street, Liverpool, in the year 1731, one year
only after the birth of Josiah Wedgwood; and was apprenticed to Mr.
Alderman Shaw, the Delft ware potter, of whom I have already spoken.
About 1752 he commenced business on his own account, for which purpose
he took, or erected, some small works on the north side, and nearly at
the bottom of Shaw’s Brow, where he began making the ordinary kind of
Delft ware of the period, the same as he had learned to manufacture
during his apprenticeship. These productions he, as well as the other
makers in Liverpool, in great measure exported to what were then our
American colonies, now the United States of America. In the manufacture
of this ordinary blue and white ware--the staple of the trade as it
then existed--Chaffers continued for some years actively employed. From
the Delft ware Chaffers passed on to the manufacture of fine white
earthenware, and produced an excellent body, and an almost faultless
glaze. The rapid strides which Wedgwood was making in the art served
as a strong incentive to Richard Chaffers, and he determined to go on
improving until his productions should equal those of his great rival.
In this, of course, he did not succeed, but he _did_ succeed in making
the pottery of Liverpool better than that of most localities. A dated,
though not very early, example of Chaffers’s make is fortunately in the
Mayer museum and is here engraved (Fig. 20). It is, Mr. Mayer says, “a
pepper-box of the hour-glass shape,” painted in blue on a white ground,
with a chequered border at top and bottom, and the name,

  [Illustration: Richard Chaffers 1769

  Fig. 21.]

round the waist. “So well known was the ware of Mr. Chaffers in the
American colonies,” continues Mr. Mayer, “that it was a common saying
of a person that was angry, that ‘He’s as hot as Dick’s pepper-box,’
alluding to those made by Mr. Chaffers, who exported a very large
portion of his manufacture to the then English colonies.” But here I
think he is decidedly in error. The example is, no doubt, a pounce-box
or pounce-pot of the ordinary and not at all uncommon form, and was
made and painted with his name and date so prominently, for use on his
own desk. This pounce-box remained in the family of its maker until it
was presented to Mr. Mayer by the grandson of Richard Chaffers, Mr.
John Rosson.

In 1754 or 1755 William Cookworthy, of Plymouth, as I have already
shown in my account of those works, discovered the “moor stone,
or growan stone, and growan clay”--two important materials in the
manufacture of china--in Cornwall, and in 1768 he took out his patent
for the manufacture of porcelain from those materials. Chaffers having
determined upon prosecuting researches into the nature of china ware,
and of endeavouring to produce it at Liverpool, entered into a series
of experiments, but finding that the “soap-stone” was essential for
his purpose, and that the district where it was found was held by
lease for its production, so as to keep the monopoly of its use to
Cookworthy and those whom he might supply with it, he determined to try
and seek the stone in a fresh locality. About this time a Mr. Podmore,
who had for some years been employed by Josiah Wedgwood, and who was
a good practical potter, and a man of sound judgment, left Wedgwood’s
employment, intending to emigrate to America, and establish himself as
a potter in that country. To this end he went to Liverpool, intending
thence to embark for the colony. On reaching Liverpool, he called
upon Mr. Chaffers, who was then the leading man in the trade at that
place, and the result of their meeting was, that Mr. Chaffers finding
Podmore to be a man of “so much intelligence and practical knowledge,
induced him, by a most liberal offer, to forego his American project,
and enter into his service.” This Podmore entirely confirmed the views
of his new master as to the importance of getting a supply of the
Cornish materials, and the two practical men together soon effected
improvements in the then manufacture of earthenware, and laid their
plans for future operations. Of the manner in which Chaffers set about
his search, and the successful results at which he arrived, Mr. Mayer
gives the following graphic account:--

   “Mr. Chaffers’s object now was to come into the field with
   Staffordshire _pari materiâ_, if I may be allowed that play
   upon words. He therefore determined to set out for Cornwall
   upon the forlorn hope of discovering a vein of soap-rock. The
   operations would be most expensive and laborious, somewhat akin
   to the process of boring for coal in our country. But where
   was he to begin? On whose estate, was it to be found? What
   description of men was he to employ? He was, however, in the
   prime of manhood, of untiring energy, of fine address, and,
   what was then necessary, an excellent horseman. He obtained
   letters of introduction from the Earl of Derby, Lord Strange,
   his eldest son, and other men of consequence in our county, to
   some of the leading landowners in Cornwall, then attending their
   duties in Parliament. In those days there were no mail-coaches
   and railways to aid the weary traveller. A stout horse was the
   only means of conveyance for a man of the higher class. Imagine
   Mr. Chaffers, having taken leave of his wife, and his numerous
   family and friends, mounted with a pair of saddle-bags under
   him, containing a supply of linen, &c., a thousand guineas,--the
   first instalment to pay the wages of the miners,--a brace of
   pistols in his holsters, pursuing his journey to London. He
   had made considerable progress in practical geology, though
   the science was then but little cultivated. Having, during his
   stay in London, obtained permission to bore for soap-rock from
   more than one of the principal proprietors of mountain land he
   judged most likely to yield it, he proceeded to Cornwall and
   commenced operations. His first efforts were not successful.
   He moved to another quarter with no better result; in a word,
   he expended large sums of money without finding the wished-for
   vein. Somewhat disheartened but not subdued, he determined to
   return home, where his presence was much wanted. He did not,
   however, intend to abandon, but only suspend, his operations.
   He accordingly assembled all the miners in his employ, and
   announced to them, to their great regret, his determination.
   Previously to his departure, he scrupulously paid every man his
   wages. One of them was missing: he was told the man in question
   was gone up the mountain to try another place. He then left
   that man’s wages in the hands of the ‘captain of the gang,’
   and, mounting his horse with a heavy heart, took leave of the
   men, to whom his animated and conciliatory manners had greatly
   endeared him. The road to the nearest town, the name of which
   I never could learn, was precipitous and rugged. A traveller
   on horseback made so little progress, that a mountaineer on
   foot, by taking a short cut over the rocky crags, could easily
   come within earshot of him. After journeying for some time, he
   thought he heard a faint cry in the distance; he dismounted,
   and, ascending a hill, plainly saw the signal of discovery
   flying from a lofty peak. It appeared that the man who had
   separated from his fellow-miners, and pursued his researches
   alone, had discovered a vein, and finding Mr. Chaffers had
   left them, he hoisted the preconcerted signal, and pursued him
   across the mountain with the pleasing intelligence, shouting at
   times to attract the somewhat dispirited traveller’s attention.
   Mr. Chaffers immediately returned, took the whole gang into
   permanent employment, and obtained an ample supply of the
   long-sought-for clay, which was conveyed to the nearest port,
   and shipped thence to Liverpool. On its arrival the vessel
   entered with its precious freight into the Old Dock, dressed
   in colours, amidst the cheers of the assembled spectators.
   During his absence, Mr. Chaffers had regularly corresponded
   with his wife, but on his arrival in London on his return home,
   the continued fatigue he had endured, together with anxiety of
   mind, brought on a dangerous fever, under which he laboured for
   several weeks. He was unknown at the inn where he stayed; but
   the landlord, seeing that his guest--a very handsome man--had
   the dress and demeanour of a gentleman, called in an eminent
   physician, who sedulously and skilfully attended his patient.
   The doctor examined his saddle-bags, and having ascertained
   his name and address from the letters and papers therein,
   communicated to his anxious wife all the particulars of his
   illness, and concluded with the consoling intelligence that ‘he
   could that day pronounce him out of danger.’ As soon as he could
   travel, he delighted his family and friends with his presence in
   Liverpool. No sooner had Mr. Chaffers arrived at home, than he
   set to work with his new materials, and soon produced articles
   that gained him much reputation, as was frankly acknowledged by
   the great Wedgwood, to whom Mr. Chaffers presented a tea-set
   of his china ware, and who, on looking at one of the cups,
   admiring the body and examining the colours used in decoration,
   exclaimed, ‘This puts an end to the battle! Mr. Chaffers beats
   us all in his colours and with his knowledge; he can make
   colours for two guineas which I cannot produce so good for
   five!’”

William Cookworthy discovered the Cornish stone about the year 1754
or 1755, and Richard Chaffers must soon afterwards have prosecuted
his researches in the same direction, for in December, 1756, we find
him making his “porcelain or china ware” in considerable quantities,
both for home sale and for exportation. This is shown by the evidence
of _Williamson’s Liverpool Advertiser and Mercantile Register_
for the 10th of December, 1756, in which the following advertisement,
discovered by Mr. Mayer, occurs:--

   “Chaffers and Co., China Manufactory.--The porcelain or china
   ware made by Messrs. Richard Chaffers & Co., is sold nowhere in
   the town, but at the manufactory on Shaw’s Brow. Considerable
   abatement for exportation, and to all wholesale dealers.
   N.B.--All the ware is proved with boiling water before it is
   exposed for sale.”

Liverpool may therefore boast of producing its china in 1756, if not
in 1755, which is an early date in the annals of English porcelain
manufacture. Not only, however, in this year did Richard Chaffers and
Co. make china-ware, but another firm, that of William Reid and Co.,
held at the same time, as I shall presently show, the “Liverpool China
Manufactory,” where they produced blue and white ware in considerable
quantities.

  [Illustration: Fig. 22.]

Of the “china ware” made by Richard Chaffers some excellent examples
are in the Mayer collection. They are unmarked, but remained in the
possession of the family until they passed from Chaffers’s descendant
to Mr. Mayer. One of these is the cup (Fig. 22.) It is, of course,
of “hard paste,” and is of remarkably compact and excellent texture.
It is painted, after the Indian style, with figure and landscape of
good and rich colours, and is faultless in manipulation and in its
glaze. Examples of Chaffers’s china are of exceeding rarity, but in
the Mayer collection is a fine jug, bearing in front a portrait of
Frederick the Great, with trophies of war on either side. This jug has
the peculiarity of being painted inside as well as out. At the bottom,
inside, is the Prussian Eagle in a border; in the spout is a trophy,
and all around the inside of the vessel roses and other flowers are
spangled about.

Chaffers carried on his works for some years, making both earthenware
and china--the former largely, the latter but to a limited extent--but
was suddenly cut off in the midst of his usefulness, and at an
early age. It appears that Podmore, his foreman, being seized with
a malignant fever, and beyond hope of recovery, sent a message to
Chaffers, expressing “his wish to see his dear master once more before
their final separation.” With this request Mr. Chaffers, who was a man
of full and sanguine habit, most kindly but unfortunately complied,
and at once visited the sufferer. The consequence was he took the
fever, and soon afterwards died, and master and servant were interred
near to each other in St. Nicholas’s churchyard. “This unfortunate
event, by taking away both master and principal assistant, put an
end to the prosecution of the trade, and was the commencement of the
breaking up of that branch of the art which Mr. Chaffers had mainly
brought to such a high state of perfection. A great number of the
potters ultimately emigrated to America, whilst many of the best hands
transferred themselves to the service of Mr. Wedgwood, or were hired by
other Staffordshire manufacturers.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_Reid & Co._--About the year 1753 or 1754, I believe, works were
established in Liverpool by a Mr. William Reid, who afterwards took
a partner and conducted his business under the style of Reid & Co.
These works, in 1756, were called “the Liverpool China Manufactory.”
In that year Messrs. Reid & Co. opened a warehouse in Castle Street,
as is shown by the following announcement in Williamson’s _Liverpool
Advertiser_ of November 19, 1756:--

   “Liverpool China Manufactory.--Messrs. Reid & Co., proprietors
   of the China Manufactory, have opened their warehouse in Castle
   Street, and sell all kinds of blue and white china ware, not
   inferior to any make in England, both wholesale and retail.
   Samples sent to any gentlemen or ladies in the country who will
   pay carriage. Good allowance for shopkeepers and exporters.”

In 1758, Messrs. Reid & Co. removed their warehouse to the top of
Castle Hey, where, having largely increased their business, they
occupied much more extensive premises. In the same year they were found
advertising for apprentices for the painters in the china manufactory.
In 1760, again, the works appear to have considerably increased, and
“several apprentices for the china work” were advertised for, as well
as “a sober, careful man, who understands sorting and packing of ware
and merchants’ accounts.” Messrs. Reid & Co. continued in business
many years, and produced, besides their “china ware,” a considerable
quantity of the ordinary blue and white earthenware, most of which was
exported.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Pennington._--Another of the principal manufacturers of Liverpool
pottery was Seth Pennington, of whose works, as well as those of
his two brothers, a few words may well be here introduced. Of the
Penningtons, three brothers were potters, and each had separate works.
Their names were James, John, and Seth, and they were sons of John
Pennington, a maltster, by his wife, formerly a Mrs. Johnson, of
Everton. James Pennington, the eldest, had his works on Copperas Hill,
but produced only the commoner varieties of ware, and being dissipated,
and having done his youngest brother a serious injury by divulging
a secret in the mixing of colour, he removed to Worcester, where he
obtained employment, and where, at a later period, one of his sons
painted a fine dinner service for the Duke of York.

  [Illustration: Fig. 23.--Part of Pennington’s Works.]

John Pennington, the second son, had his pot-works at Upper Islington,
which he carried on for some time. Ultimately he sold the concern to a
Mr. Wolf, “who being a scientific man, made great improvements in the
ware, but ultimately finding it did not answer, as the Staffordshire
potters were making such rapid strides towards monopolising the whole
trade, he gave up the manufacture, and the works were closed, never to
be resumed.”

  [Illustration: Figs. 24 and 25.]

Seth Pennington, the youngest of the three brothers, it appears, had
his pot-works in that nest of potters, Shaw’s Brow. His factories were
very large, extending as far as Clayton Street, and were conducted
with much spirit. At these works, Seth Pennington, besides the
ordinary classes of earthenware then in use, and which he produced
in large quantities both for home consumption and for exportation,
made a remarkably fine kind of ware that successfully competed, for
vases and beakers, with the oriental, both in its colour, its glaze,
and its decoration. He also produced many remarkably large and fine
punch-bowls both in Delft ware, in fine earthenware, and, latterly, in
china. The largest size bowl I have met with was made by Pennington,
at these works, and is here shown. This fine bowl, which is 20½ inches
in diameter and 9 inches in height, is painted in blue on the usual
white ground. Outside it is decorated with a landscape with two bridges
in the foreground, on which men are standing to fish, trees, houses,
church, &c., &c. Inside the upper part of the bowl is decorated with
a series of six trophies, composed of flags, swords, cannons, drums,
trumpets, spears, &c., divided from each other by different kinds
of shot, viz., chain, crescent, arrow or triangle shell with fusee
burning, cross or bar, and grape. In the centre, and filling up the
inside of the bowl, with the exception of the border, is a group of
ships and boats on the water, with the inscription beneath it--

                     Success to the Africa Trade,
                           George Dickinson.

  [Illustration: Figs. 26 to 30.]

This bowl was painted probably about the year 1760–70 by John Robinson,
who was apprenticed, and afterwards employed, at Pennington’s works.
Robinson subsequently removed into Staffordshire, and ultimately
presented the bowl to the Potteries Mechanics’ Institution at Hanley,
where it is now carefully preserved along with his note--“John
Robinson, a pot painter, served his time at Pennington’s, in Shaw’s
Brow, and there painted this punch-bowl.” Several other bowls of
Pennington’s make are in the Mayer collection. Of these, two of the
finest are dated. One bears on its outside a design of trees, birds,
and butterflies, painted in yellow and green, and on its inside a
ship in full sail, with the words, “Success to the Monmouth, 1760.”
The other has on the outside a soldier and a sailor, one of whom is
seated on the stock of an anchor, and holding in one hand a sword,
and in the other a punch-bowl; and the other sitting, Bacchus-like,
astride a barrel. Between them is a chest, bearing the words “Spanish
gold;” while inside the bowl is a painting of a ship in full sail, with
the words, “1779. Success to the Isabella.” Of the fine earthenware
vases and beakers illustrations are given on Figs. 26 to 30. They
form part of a set of chimney ornaments, purchased by Mr. Mayer from
the only and aged daughter of Seth Pennington, by whom they had been
treasured as examples of her father’s manufacture. In the making of
blue colour, Pennington succeeded in beating all his competitors, and
it is said that a Staffordshire manufacturer offered him a thousand
guineas for his recipe. This he refused, “as it was a source of great
profit to him, being kept so secret that none ever mixed the colours
but himself.” His brother James, however, whom I have spoken of as
being a dissipated man, persuaded him to tell him his secret, and soon
afterwards, in one of his drunken bouts, told it to a pot-companion,
who at once sold it to the Staffordshire house, and thus did Pennington
a grievous injury. Seth Pennington took into partnership a Mr. Port,
but the connection was not of long duration. Having turned his
attention to the manufacture of china, he produced some excellent
services and other pieces in that material. In china[3] he also
produced punch-bowls, as well as services. Pennington is said to have
used the following marks--

  [Illustration: Figs. 31 and 32.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Christian._--Philip Christian was another of the famous Liverpool
potters, and had his works also on Shaw’s Brow, but higher up than
those of Pennington. They were on the site of what is now known as
Islington Terrace. His house was at the corner of Christian Street,
which was called after his name. At these works he produced octagonal
and other shaped plates of tortoiseshell ware, as well as bowls
and other pieces of the same material. He also made the ordinary
earthenware of the time. Here, later on, he manufactured china[4] to a
considerable extent, and, after the death of Richard Chaffers, is said
to have become the leading potter in the place. Mr. Christian is said
to have produced in china ware some remarkably good dinner, tea, and
coffee services, as well as a number of vases and other ornaments. It
is, however, impossible at present to authenticate his productions, so
similar are they to those of other makers of the same time and place.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Patrick’s Hill Pot-house._--In 1760 the firm of Thomas Deare & Co.
took the old Delft ware pottery at Patrick’s Hill, known as the
“Patrick’s Hill Pot-house,” where they manufactured “all sorts of the
best blue and white earthenware.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Flint Pot Works._--About the same time a Mr. Okell carried on “The
Flint Pot Works,” which were situated at the upper end of Park Lane,
near the Pitch House. Here he made blue and white earthenware, and
afterwards the more fashionable cream-coloured ware. Mr. Okell died in
1773–74, and the works were then taken by Messrs. Rigg and Peacock,
who immediately advertised their intention of “making all kinds
of cream-coloured earthenware, &c.” Mr. Rigg was, I have reason to
believe, from Newcastle-under-Lyme, and a descendant of the celebrated
Charles Rigg, the pipe-maker of that town. In the same year there was
also a pot-house, called the “Mould Works,” carried on by Messrs. Woods
& Co., near the infirmary, but where nothing of a finer description
than jars, sugar-moulds (for sugar refiners), crucibles, chimney-pots,
melting-pots, black mugs, and the like, were made.

In 1761 Liverpool was the scene of a strongly contested election
between three rival candidates, viz., Sir William Meredith, Bart.,
Sir Ellis Cuncliffe, Bart., and Charles Pole, Esq., and the election
was carried by the potters, one hundred and two of whom gave plumpers
for Sir William. This is proved by the poll and squib book, which was
published by John Sadler, and I allude to the circumstance for the
purpose of introducing an engraving of one of the drinking-mugs made
specially for the occasion by the “jolly potters” of Liverpool. This
mug is of common white earthen ware, and has a rude border, with the
words,

                              Ser William
                                   a
                               Plumper,

scratched in, in blue, in the soft clay before firing.

  [Illustration: Fig. 33.]

In connection with this election, a song written especially for the
potters, and no doubt sung while this very mug was filled with strong
ale, and passed round from mouth to mouth, is worth reprinting:--


                          THE POTTER’S SONG.

             _To the tune of “Ye mortals whom fancy,” &c._

                  ADDRESSED TO THE PLUMPING POTTERS.

    Ye true-hearted fellows, free plumpers and men,
    Independent in Britain, how great is your claim!
    Not power without candour can soothe with a smile,
    Or forms of vain grandeur e’en fancy beguile.


                                CHORUS.

    And thus sings the parent of liberty’s cause,
        If my son you would be,
        If my son you would be,
    Like Britons undaunted, like Britons be free.

    Tranquillity, heightened by friendship’s supply,
    Degraded may censure, with malice stalk by!
    Auspiciously reigning, those plumpers, they say,
    Unluckily carry the spoils of each day.
                                        And thus, &c.

    Regardless of great ones, we live uncontrolled,
    We’re potters and plumpers, we’re not to be sold.
    No purchase but merit can cheapen such souls,
    Thus circled in friendship, we live by our bowls.
                                        And thus, &c.

    Regained, now preserve the true blessing of choice,
    And strike at the wretch that would blast a free voice;
    Thus rich in possession of what is our own,
    Sir William’s our member, Squire Charley may moan.
                                        And thus, &c.

  [Illustration: Fig. 34.--Herculaneum Pottery.]

The HERCULANEUM POTTERY,--the largest earthenware manufactory ever
established in Liverpool,--was founded in the year 1796, on the site
of some old copper works on the south shore of the river Mersey at
Toxteth Park. The pottery had originally been established about the
year 1793–4, by Richard Abbey, who took into partnership a Scotchman
named Graham. Richard Abbey was born at Aintree, and was apprenticed to
John Sadler, in Harrington Street, as an engraver, where he produced
many very effective groups for mugs, jugs, tiles, &c. Of these, one
of his best productions was the well-known group of the “Farmer’s
Arms.” After leaving Sadler’s employment, Abbey removed to Glasgow,
where he was an engraver at the pot-works, and afterwards served in
a similar capacity in France, before he began business in Liverpool.
Messrs. Abbey and Graham were successful in their factory at Toxteth
Park, but Abbey growing tired of the business, they sold it to Messrs.
Worthington, Humble, and Holland, and he retired to his native village,
where he died in 1801, “at the age of eighty-one, after breaking a
blood-vessel whilst singing in Melling Church, where, being a good
musician, he used to lead the choir on a Sunday. He was buried at
Walton.”

In the Mayer museum is a teapot of cream-coloured ware, with black
printing, of Richard Abbey’s making. On one side is “The Farmer’s
Arms,” with supporters quarterly: viz., 1st, a sheaf of corn; 2nd,
two scythes in _saltier_, across them in _fess_ two flails, knitted
together by a sickle; 3rd, a hay rake and hay fork in _saltier_, with
a three-pronged fork, prongs upwards, in _pale_; 4th, a riddle and a
bushel measure; crest, a plough; supporters, a dairymaid with a churn,
and a mower with a scythe; motto, “In God is our trust.” On the other
side is the appropriate verse;--

      May the mighty and great
      Roll in splendour and state;
    I envy them not, I declare it;
      I eat my own Lamb,
      My Chicken and Ham,
    I shear my own sheep, and I wear it.

      I have Lawns, I have Bowers,
      I have Fruits, I have Flowers,
    The Lark is my morning alarmer;
      So you jolly Dogs now,
      Here’s “God bless the Plow,”
    Long Life and content to the Farmer.

On taking to these works, Messrs. Worthington, Humble, and Holland
engaged as their foreman and manager, Mr. Ralph Mansfield, of Burslem.
This person served them for some years, and afterwards commenced a
small pottery on his own account at Bevington Bush, where he made only
the commoner kinds of earthenware. These works ceased at his death.
Besides Mansfield the foreman, the new Company engaged about forty
“hands,” men, women, and children, in Staffordshire, and brought them
to Liverpool to work in different branches of their art. As Wedgwood
had chosen to call _his_ new colony “Etruria,” the enterprising company
determined on christening _their_ colony “Herculaneum,” which name they
at once adopted, and stamped it on their wares. The buildings acquired
from Richard Abbey were considerably enlarged, the arrangements
remodelled, new ovens and workshops erected, houses for the workmen
built, and then workpeople were brought from Staffordshire. The story
of the removal of this band of artisans is thus pleasantly told by my
friend Mr. Mayer: “After enlarging and remodelling the works, and the
little group of emigrants, who were chiefly from Staffordshire, being
ready to start, their employers gave them a dinner at the Legs of Man
public-house at Burslem, to which a few of their friends were invited.
There they spent the parting night in jollity and mirth; and at a
late hour, in conformity with an old Mercian custom, still prevalent
in some parts of Staffordshire, the parting cup was called for, and
each pledged the other to a loving remembrance when absent, and a safe
journey and a hearty goodwill. Next morning at an early hour they
started on their journey, headed by a band of music, and flags bearing
appropriate inscriptions, amongst which was one, ‘Success to the Jolly
Potters,’ a motto still met with on the signs of the public-houses in
the Staffordshire pot districts. When reaching the Grand Trunk Canal,
which runs near to the town of Burslem, after bidding farewell to all
their relatives and friends, they got into the boats prepared for them,
and were towed away amid the shouts of hundreds of spectators. Now,
however, came the time for thought. They had left their old homes, the
hearths of their forefathers, and were going to a strange place. Still
the hopes of bettering themselves were strongest in their thoughts,
and they arrived in Runcorn in good spirits, having amused themselves
in various ways during their canal passage, by singing their peculiar
local songs, which, as ‘craft’ songs, perhaps stand unrivalled in
any employment for richness of material, elegance of thought, and
expression of passion and sentiment, and it is to be regretted that
many of them are daily becoming lost. Amongst other amusements was one
that created much merriment--drawing lots for the houses they were to
live in, which had been built for them by their employers; and as they
had not seen them, nor knew anything about them, the only preference to
be striven for was whether it should be No. 1, 2, 3, &c.

“At Runcorn they stayed all night, as the weather was bad and the river
very rough, after one of those storm-days frequent in the Mersey,
when the waters are lashed by the wind into such fury, that few boats
dare venture out, and many who had never seen salt water before, were
afraid to trust themselves upon it in a flat. Next morning, November
11, 1796, the wind had subsided. They embarked on board the flat, and
at once, with a fair wind, got into the middle of the Mersey, where it
becomes more like an inland sea surrounded by lofty mountain ranges.
This much surprised the voyagers, alike by its picturesque beauty and
the vast extent of water. They had a pleasant voyage down the river,
and arriving at their destination, were met on their landing by a band
of music, and marched into the works amidst the cheers of a large crowd
of people, who had assembled to greet them. Thus commenced the peopling
of the little colony called Herculaneum, where a few years ago, on
visiting the old nurse of my father, who had accompanied her son there,
I heard the same peculiar dialect of language as is spoken in their
mother district in Staffordshire, which to those not brought up in that
locality, is almost unintelligible.”

From this it will be seen that the little colony was peopled in the
middle of November, 1796. The works were opened on the 8th of December,
on which occasion an entertainment was given to the workpeople, as will
be seen from the following interesting paragraph from _Gore’s General
Advertiser_ of December 13th, 1796:--

   “On Saturday last, the new pottery (formerly the copper
   works)[5] near this town was opened, and a plentiful
   entertainment given by Mr. Worthington, the proprietor, to
   upwards of sixty persons employed in the manufactory, who were
   preceded by a military band, from the works along the docks
   and through Castle Street. Two colours were displayed on the
   occasion, one representing a distant view of the manufactory.
   We have the pleasure to say, that these works are very likely
   to succeed, from their extent and situation, and will be of
   infinite advantage to the merchants of Liverpool.”

The first productions of the Herculaneum works were confined to
blue-printed ware, in which dinner, toilet, tea, and coffee services,
punch-bowls, mugs, and jugs, were the principal articles made; and
cream-coloured ware, which was then so fashionable. At a later date,
terra-cotta vases and other articles were produced, as were also
biscuit vases, figures, &c.

Of the cream-coloured ware, or Queen’s ware, the examples which have
come under my notice are of remarkably fine quality, and are as well
and carefully potted as those of any other manufactory, scarcely even
excepting Wedgwood’s own. In colour they are of a somewhat darker shade
than Wedgwood’s and Mayer’s, and not of so yellow a cast as the Leeds
ware. The collector will find some good examples of this ware in the
Mayer Museum at Liverpool, which will serve for comparison with other
makes. The Herculaneum works also produced some remarkably good jugs
with bas-relief figures, foliage, &c, of extremely fine and hard body.
These pieces, which rival Turner’s celebrated jugs, are marked with the
name HERCULANEUM in small capitals, impressed.

In terra-cotta, vases of good design, as well as other pieces, were
produced. In the possession of Mr. Beard is a remarkably fine pair
of covered vases, with boldly-modelled heads of satyrs for handles,
and festoons on the sides. The vases are black, and the heads
and festoons gilt. This fine pair is marked HERCULANEUM. In Mr.
Rathbone’s collection is a wine cooler of vine leaves and grapes, of
similar design, and of the same reddish colour as some of Wedgwood’s
terra-cotta coolers. It is marked HERCULANEUM, impressed on the bottom.

In Blue Printing the Herculaneum Works produced many remarkably good
patterns, and the earthenware bearing those patterns was of a fine
hard and compact body, of excellent glaze, and the potting remarkably
good and skilful. Some services had open-work basket rims, of similar
design to those produced by Davenport. One service bore views of the
principal towns in England, the names of which were printed in blue
on the bottoms of each piece, which mostly bear the impressed mark of
HERCULANEUM in large capitals. Batt printing was also practised.

  [Illustration: CAMBRIDGE

  Fig. 35.]

In 1800 the manufactory was considerably increased, and again in 1806
it received many additions. At this time, in order to augment the
working capital, the number of proprietors was increased. Early in the
present century china was made at these works, and continued to be
produced, though not to a large extent, to the time of the close of
the works. Of the china produced several examples may be seen in the
Mayer museum. In 1822 it was ordered by proprietors at a meeting held
in that year, that “to give publicity and identity to the china and
earthenware manufactured by the Herculaneum Pottery Company, the words
‘Herculaneum Pottery’ be stamped or marked on some conspicuous part of
all china and earthenware made and manufactured at the manufactory.”
In 1833 the company was dissolved, and the property sold for £25,000
to Mr. Ambrose Lace, who leased the premises to Thomas Case and James
Mort, who are said to have carried on the business for about three
years only. By these gentlemen, it is said, the mark of the “Liver” was
introduced. About 1836 the firm of Case, Mort & Co. was succeeded by
that of Mort and Simpson, who continued the manufactory until its close
in 1841. During the time the works were carried on by Case, Mort & Co.,
a fine dinner-service, of which a portion is in Mr. Mayer’s museum, was
made for the corporation of Liverpool. It was blue-printed, and had on
each piece the arms of Liverpool carefully engraved, and emblazoned.
In the same collection is part of another service of somewhat similar
description, but with the earlier mark of HERCULANEUM impressed. The
marks used at the Herculaneum Works at different periods appear to have
been the word

                 HERCULANEUM               HERCULANEUM

impressed in large capitals. The same in small capitals, also
impressed. These have generally a number attached, which, of course,
is simply the mark of the workman or of the pattern. The same name
also occasionally occurs in blue printing. A crown, with the word
Herculaneum in a curve, above it, impressed. A crown within a garter,
bearing the word Herculaneum; impressed. (Figs. 36 and 37.) The words
in capitals, impressed,

                              HERCULANEUM
                               POTTERY.

  [Illustration: HERCULANEUM

  Fig. 36.]

  [Illustration: HERCULANEUM

  Fig. 37.]

The crest of the borough of Liverpool, a bird called the _Liver_, or
_Lever_, with wings expanded, and bearing its beak a sprig of the plant
liverwort. Of this mark of the crest three varieties are shown on Figs.
38 to 40; they are all impressed in the ware. An anchor, with and
without the word LIVERPOOL in a curve, above it (Fig. 41), impressed.
Another, and more imposing looking mark, has the name of the pattern
(“PEKIN PALM,” for instance) within a wreath of foliage, surmounted
with the crest of Liverpool, on an heraldic wreath.

  [Illustration: Figs. 38 to 40.]

  [Illustration: LIVERPOOL.

  Fig. 41.]

Among the men of eminence who have been connected with the potteries
of Liverpool, besides those named, were William Roscoe, the eminent
Art-critic and biographer; Peter Pever Burdett, the engraver, who also
worked for Wedgwood, and who introduced the process of transferring
aquatints to pottery and porcelain; Paul Sandby, who assisted other
manufactories; and other artists of note. It may also be well to say
a word or two on those pieces which more than others are considered
to be “Liverpool pottery,” and which, indeed, I believe are thought
by many collectors to be the only kind ever made there. I allude to
the mugs, plates, &c., of cream-coloured ware which are decorated with
ships or with flags of different merchants, and signals. These were
principally made at the works of Guy Green, in Harrington Street, of
whom I have already spoken. Some pieces have the engraving of the
lighthouse and flags, with the name, “An east view of Liverpool Light
House and Signals on Bidston Hill, 1788.” The flags are all numbered,
and beneath are references, with the owner’s names, to forty-three
different flags. Another piece with the same date has forty-four flags
and owners’ names, showing the addition of a new merchant in that year.
Others again, without date, show fifty and seventy-five flags, and are
therefore interesting as showing the rapid extension of the port. These
pieces are very sharply engraved and printed in black, and the flags on
some of the pieces are coloured.


                            WARRINGTON.[6]

This pottery was one of but short duration, but during the time it was
in operation some very good ware was produced. The works were commenced
about 1797 or 1798, by Messrs. James and Fletcher Bolton, who were
brothers, and members of the Society of Friends. These gentlemen got
their idea of starting an earthenware manufactory at Warrington from
the fact that the great bulk of the raw materials from Cornwall, &c.,
used in the Staffordshire manufactories for the finer kinds of wares,
was brought by sea to Liverpool, where it was unshipped and sent on
again by boats on the Trent and Mersey Canal, and thus passed within a
short distance of Warrington. Messrs. Bolton, with this knowledge, and
with the further fact before them that the Liverpool potters drove a
very successful trade, very shrewdly argued that if the Staffordshire
manufacturers could make money, with the longer freightage from
Ellesmere, they, at Warrington, with the shorter freightage, might
hope for equal success. Soon after the establishment of the works
they associated themselves with Mr. Joseph Ellis, of Hanley, in
Staffordshire, who was practically conversant with every branch of the
manufacture. Joseph Ellis was born in 1760, and was apprenticed to
Wedgwood, as a _turner_. He is said to have been very clever and
ingenious, of careful and sober habits, and of a plodding disposition.
He married a daughter of Ralph and Ellen Simpson, of Hanley, a family
then considered to be in very fair circumstances, from whom he derived
considerable pecuniary help, which, together with his own thrifty
habits, soon placed him in comfortable circumstances. Mr. Ellis became
superintendent of the Tabernacle Independent Chapel Sunday-school, now
said to be the oldest place of worship of that denomination left in the
Potteries. As his family began to increase, he disposed of his property
in the potteries, joined Messrs. Bolton at Warrington, and became the
managing partner of the firm. He is said to have directed his special
attention in all his spare time to the discovery of new colours,
glazes, and bodies, and to have been very successful in jasper and
enamelled ware. To the manager of some adjoining glass-works he also
gave many useful recipes for colours. Mr. Ellis’s manuscript recipes
for different glazes and colours required in the manufacture are still
preserved in the hands of his descendants, and show him to have been a
man of considerable practical knowledge and skill.

A number of potters were engaged at Hanley and the other pottery towns,
and they, with their wives and children, forming quite a little colony,
and their household goods, tools, and everything requisite for their
use and for the trade they were engaged in, were brought by canal to
Warrington, where kilns, sheds, and other buildings were erected.
Here they commenced operations. The goods made at these works were
intended principally for the American markets, and a good trade was
soon established. The works continued to flourish until 1807, “when the
embargo which was laid by the Americans upon all articles of British
manufacture, and the subsequent war between Great Britain and America,
in 1812, caused the failure, by bankruptcy, of the firm.”

In 1802, Mr. Ellis appears to have fallen into a weak state, and
his share in the concern was given up on condition of an annuity
being granted to himself and his widow and children, so long as the
pot-works were carried on. With the failure of the works of course this
arrangement ceased. He died at Warrington, and was buried in the old
dissenting burial-ground at Hill Cliff, near that town.

The potters, with their wives and families, their household goods
and tools, and all their other belongings, on the failure of the
firm, returned to Staffordshire in the same manner as they arrived.
During their stay at Warrington, they are described as having held
little or no communication with the townspeople; marrying only and
solely amongst themselves; preserving their own manners, customs, and
amusements; and, beyond purchasing at shop or market the necessaries
of life, keeping quite aloof from “the natives,” with a pertinacity
so remarkable as still to be the subject of occasional remark. The
expressions, “as proud as th’ potters!” and “as close as th’ potters!”
are still to be heard, and serve to perpetuate the remembrance of the
class-feeling which existed. They dwelt in “Pottery Row, Bank Quay,” on
the bank of the river Mersey, and this name is the only local record
which Warrington now possesses of this little colony of industrious
workpeople. The factory itself has been successively converted into
lime-kilns and an iron ship-building yard, and is now used as a
chemical works.

Of the productions of the works Dr. Kendrick has got together a
number of examples, which he has deposited in the Warrington museum.
The wares produced were an ordinary quality of white ware; blue and
white printed goods, and common painted goods; as well as an inferior
description of black-jasper ware, and both gold and silver lustre.
Besides these, a china ware is said to have been made to some extent,
but of this, although the matter is generally believed, there is,
perhaps, some little doubt. Among the examples in the Museum is a black
teapot of somewhat curious character. It is of a hard, but somewhat
inferior black ware, and is ornamented with raised borders and groups
of figures--some of the borders, the figures, and the swan knob of the
lid, being surface-painted in yellow, red, &c. The lid is attached by
a hinge. Another curious piece is a “tobacco-jar, comprising within
itself a drinking mug and a candlestick,” and also a small upright jar,
capable of holding exactly half-an-ounce of tea,--the quantity, we are
told, which was served out to each visitor to the tea-gardens of that
day. The china ware attributed to these works is somewhat curious.
It is of a kind of creamy colour, and of inferior quality, and is
ornamented with raised borders, &c, and with groups of figures in blue.
In general appearance it is more like earthenware than porcelain. Among
the examples, stated by Dr. Kendrick to have been made at Warrington,
is a lantern of Delft ware, ornamented with flowers in blue. There
are, however, grave doubts as to this having been made in this
locality. No mark is known. This distinction is believed to have been
omitted in consequence of the jealous dislike of the Americans of that
day to anything emanating from the mother country.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Warrington Pottery._--These works, in a locality where older ones
had long existed, were established in 1850 in Dallman Lane, by the
late Mr. John Welsby, who manufactured stoneware, Rockingham and black
tea-pots, coarse red ware, terra cotta chimney tops (the construction
of the “Dallman Chimney Pot” being very effectual for preventing
smoky chimneys), ornamental garden vases, flower-pots, pancheons,
&c. On his death, in 1863, the works passed into the hands of Mr.
Thomas Grace, who, in 1871, removed them to their present site, on the
Winwick Road. Mr. Grace’s productions consist of plain black ware of
various descriptions, chimney tops, and plain and fancy garden vases,
flower-pots, &c., which he supplies largely to the home markets. Most
of the goods are made from clays found on the spot, and those of Arpley
Moor, a mile or two distant from the works.


                                SUTTON.

At Sutton, near Warrington, where some potteries for the manufacture of
the commoner descriptions of wares are still worked, Dr. Kendrick is
of opinion pottery was made in mediæval times. His opinion is founded
on the fact of a fragment of a vessel in form of a mounted knight (of
somewhat the same character as those already described in last volume)
being said to be made of Sutton fire-clay. The fragment was found in
Winwick Churchyard, and is preserved in Warrington Museum; fragments of
similar ware are frequently dug up in the district.


                               RUNCORN.

_Old Quay Pottery._--These works were carried on in 1869 by Mr. John
Cliff who, in that year, removed from the Imperial Pottery, Lambeth, to
this place, where he manufactures largely chemical stoneware and other
goods. Mr. Cliff has taken out patents for an improved kiln, and for
wheels for throwers, and lathes for turners, which have the reputation
of being the most effective, simple, and valuable of any in existence.


                               PRESCOT.

_The Moss Pottery._--Mr. Thomas Spencer, who last century established
pot works at the bottom of Richmond Row, Liverpool (see Page 33) for
the production of Delft ware, removed them to Prescot, where he founded
the “Moss Pottery,” and made coarse brown ware from the native clays of
the district. At his death the works passed into the hands of his son,
who, in turn, was succeeded by his son, the present owner of the place,
Mr. Thomas Spencer. White stone ware was afterwards manufactured to a
large extent, but of late years the operations have been principally
confined to sanitary ware, one of the most notable features of which
are the socket drain pipes, for which Mr. Spencer holds a patent, dated
April 10th, 1848. Sugar moulds for sugar refiners were at one time a
staple production of the Moss Pottery, but these have been superseded
by the iron moulds now in general use. Mr. Spencer, too, has taken out
a patent (in 1861) “for improvements in apparatus for the manufacture
of articles of earthenware, and of other plastic materials” by which
saggars for burning earthenware in glass cisterns, crucibles, etc.,
are made by direct action of steam pressure. The principal goods
produced are vitrified and glazed earthenware; sanitary and chemical
wares; garden, sea-kale and other pots; black ware articles; filters;
stoneware bottles, jars, pans, barrels, foot warmers, and other useful
domestic articles.


                             ST. HELEN’S.

Messrs. Case, Mort & Co., of the Herculaneum Works at Liverpool, had,
at one time, a manufactory at St. Helen’s, where goods of common
quality were produced. Messrs. Doulton, of the Lambeth Pottery, have
also established a branch manufactory here for drain pipes, sanitary
ware, &c.


                               SEACOMBE.

Mr. Goodwin, a potter of Lane End, in Staffordshire, in 1851,
established a pottery at Seacombe, on the opposite shore of the Mersey
from Liverpool. He brought his workmen from Staffordshire, and fired
his first oven in June, 1852. Of this pottery, now closed, Mr. Mayer
thus wrote in 1855: “The ware manufactured here at present consists
principally of earthenware and stoneware, chiefly of blue and colour
printed ware, and, lately, parian has been made of a good quality.
Here has been introduced one of the throwing tables for making hollow
ware, cups, bowls, &c., by machinery, with the aid of which four
boys who are quite unacquainted with the art can, in a day or two’s
practice, produce as much work as by the old process of hand throwing
could formerly be made by five men in the same space of time. The
success of the undertaking may be considered fairly established,
and a very large and increasing trade is now carried on with the
east and west coast of South America, Turkey, California, and India.
So admirably arranged are the buildings on this work that all the
different parts work together. The ware after being fired is carried
direct from the ovens into the bisque warehouse which adjoins them, and
on the other side the coal is conveyed along a railway and deposited
close to the mouths of the kilns. The whole may be looked upon as a
model for all future buildings and arrangements for pot works. Indeed,
so perfect is it that it has been visited by several manufacturers from
France and Germany, who, by permission of Mr. Goodwin, have taken plans
of it as a guide for new works to be erected in those countries.”




                             CHAPTER III.

   Derby--Cock-pit Hill--Mayer--Heath--Derby China--Andrew
   Planché--Duesbury and Heath--William Duesbury--Purchase of the
   Chelsea Works--Weekly Bills--Show Rooms in London--Sales by
   Candle--Changes in Proprietorship--Bloor--Locker--Stevenson
   & Co.--Hancock--Painters and Modellers--Spengler--Coffee--Askew
   --Billingsley--Pinxton--Nantgarw --Swansea--Other Artists
   employed at Derby--Cocker and Whitaker’s China Works, &c., &c.


                                DERBY.

_Cock-pit Hill._--There is nothing yet known as to the time when these
works were first established. It is certain that at a tolerably early
period coarse brown ware was made here, of much the same general
character as that made at Tickenhall and by the Tofts, but researches
have as yet failed to bring to light any particulars regarding them.
There is a positive certainty that the Mayer or Mier family were
potters in Derby for more than one generation. A John Mier--an ancestor
probably of the Mayers or Meers, of Staffordshire--was a pot-maker
in 1721. Some vessels bearing his name are extant. One of these, a
posset-pot, bears the words IOHN MIER MADE THIS CUP 1721. Another has
been described as “a three-handled pot that holds about two gallons,
which is said to have been made at these pot works.” It is of coarse
brown ware, glazed, and bears the words:--

    “Drink be merry and mary
    God Bles creae George & Queen ann
    John Mier made this cup 1708.”

Another, a large pitcher in my own possession, traditionally said to
have been made in Derby, bears the initials I S between the date 1720
(Fig. 42), and below the I S the letters D F, about which it is perhaps
scarcely worth hazarding a conjecture. It is 16½ inches in height,
and is of dark brown glazed ware. The name best known in connection
with these works is that of Heath, and they were carried on by this
family for a considerable number of years. How, or when, the works
came into the hands of the Heaths, remains to be discovered. In 1772,
in some very curious and unique MS. “Lists of Gent., &c., in Derby,
1772,” in my own possession, occurs in one, under “Cock-pitt Hill,”
“Mayer Mr...... pott merchant,” and in another, “Cock-pitt Hill,” “Mr.
Mayer...... pott merchant.” In the same list, dealers are put down as
keeping a “pott shop,” while Mayer is returned as a “pott merchant.”
In this same list “John Heath” is entered as an “Alderman;” and “Mr.
Chris. Heath” as a “Comon Council Man.”

  [Illustration:

    I S 2
    DF

  Fig. 42.]

On the 1st of January, 1756, a draft of an agreement was drawn up
“between John Heath, of Derby, in the County of Derby, gentleman;
Andrew Planche, of ye same place, china maker; and Wm. Duesberry, of
Longton, in ye County of Stafford, enameller,” by which they became
“co-partners together as well in ye art of making English china as
also in buying and selling of all sorts of wares belonging to ye art
of making china” for ten years, with power on Heath’s part to extend
for another ten years. In this agreement, the original MS. of which
is in my own possession, Heath (who, it will be seen, is described as
a “gentleman,” while the others are respectively described by their
trades of “china maker” and “enameller”) agrees to pay in £1,000 to the
concern, as his share “as stock,” “to be used and employ’d in common
between them for ye carrying on ye said art of making china wares,”[7]
for which he was to receive one-third of the profits till the principal
sum of £1,000 be paid back.

One of the clauses in this agreement is as follows:--“Also it is agreed
between ye sd parties to these Presents that ye sd Copartners _shall
not at any time hereafter use or follow ye Trade aforesaid or any
other Trade whatsoever_ during ye sd Term to their private Benefit
and advantage.” From this it would seem that John Heath could not at
that time be carrying on the Cock-pit Hill Works. There is nothing to
show that this deed was ever legally executed, and two years later--in
1758--I find him named as one of the proprietors of the Cock-pit Hill
Works, along with two partners, “William Butts, gentleman,” and “Thomas
Rivett, Esquire”--Butts, I presume, being the practical man of the
concern. The document in which this appears is in my own possession,
and is a commitment of a man named John Lovegrove, one of the workmen
“at their pottery in the said Borough of Derby,” for running away from
his said service. The commitment is as follows:--

                          “BOROUGH OF DERBY.

   “To the constables of the said borough of Derby and to each and
   every of them and also to the Keeper of the House of Correction
   for the said borough.

“WHEREAS Information and complaint hath been made before me Samuel
Crompton Esquire Mayor and one of his Majesties Justices of the peace
for the said Borough by William Butts of the said Borough Gent upon his
oath that John Lovegrove was on the Thirteenth day of January last duly
hired as a Labourer and Servant to the said William Butts and to Thomas
Rivett Esquire and John Heath Gent for one year then next ensuing to
work at their Pottery in the said Borough of Derby and that the said
John Lovegrove hath departed and run away from his said service, his
said year not being expired, And Whereas in pursuance of the Statute in
that case made and provided, I have had the said William Butts and John
Lovegrove before me and have duly examined the Proofs and allegations
of both the said parties touching the matter of the said Complaint and
upon due consideration had thereof have adjudged and determined and
do hereby adjudge and determine the said Complaint to be true. These
are therefore to Command you the said constables and each and every
of you forthwith to convey the said John Lovegrove to the said House
of Correction for the said Borough of Derby and to Deliver him to the
Keeper thereof together with this warrant. And I do hereby Command you
the said Keeper to receive the said John Lovegrove into your Custody in
the said House of Correction there to remain and be corrected and held
to hard Labour for the space of [     ] from the Date hereof and for
your so doing this shall be your sufficient Warrent Given under my Hand
and seal the[     ].”

It will be seen that this commitment is not dated, but I am enabled
to fix it with certainty to 1758. Samuel Crompton was Mayor of Derby
in 1758, 1767, 1777 (to complete the year of office of Robert Hope,
deceased), 1782, and 1788, and High Sheriff of the County in 1768,
while holding office as Mayor. There is nothing in the commitment
to show to which of these years of Crompton’s Mayoralty it can be
assigned, but as Thomas Rivett, one of the partners named in it,
died in 1763, it leaves no doubt that 1758 is the correct date. This
Thomas Rivett, one of the partners, was Mayor of Derby in 1715 and
1761, and High Sheriff of the County in 1757. In 1747 he was elected
Member of Parliament for the Borough of Derby in room of John Stanhope,
deceased, and served till 1754. He died in 1763, and was buried in All
Saints’ Church. John Heath was Mayor in 1763 and 1772, and his son,
Christopher Heath, was Mayor in 1774.

The works were situated on Cock-pit Hill, at the commencement of
Siddal’s Lane. The site is still known as the “Pot Yard.” It is
distinctly marked on some of the old maps of Derby, and appears to
have stood immediately opposite the “Cock-pit” itself--an octagonal
building, with a spire-roof terminated with a vane. Buildings existed
on this spot as early as 1610, and at that time probably were employed
for the making of the rough ware of the period. In the last century
they seem to have formed three sides of a quadrangle, and to have been
of considerable extent. In 1772 it is thus spoken of in “A Short Tour
in the Midland Counties;” after speaking of the china works, the writer
says:--“Here is also a pottery, and I was showed an imitation of the
Queen’s ware, but it does not come up to the original, the produce of
Staffordshire.”

In 1780, in consequence of the failure of the Heaths (who were bankers
and men of property, besides one of them being at one time the partner
of Duesbury, and, later, the owners of these pot works), the Cock-pit
Hill Pottery sold off its stock of goods. The following is one of the
announcements of this sale.--

        “TO THE MERCHANTS, TRADERS, AND DEALERS IN EARTHENWARE.

   “To be Sold without Reserve (and considerably under the usual
   wholesale prices) at the Derby Pot Manufactory a large quantity
   of Earthenware, being the whole stock in trade of that great and
   extensive Factory commonly known by the name of the Derby Pot
   Works, consisting of an assortment of Enamelled, and Blue and
   White useful China, a large quantity of Enamelled Creamware and
   plain Cream Tea-table-ware, a great quantity of White Stone and
   Brown ware.

   “N.B.--The aforesaid Earthenware, &c., will be opened for sale
   on the 4th and 6th of April and continued every Tuesday and
   Thursday until the whole is disposed of; on which days (but no
   other in the week) a proper person will attend the sale. The
   Earthenware will be sold in different lots, and is well worth
   the notice of Pot Carriers in and about the neighbourhood of
   Coleorton Moor. No less a quantity than two horse loads will be
   sold to any one person.”

In the same year, 1780, a sale of “a large quantity of earthern and
china ware from the Pot Works on Cock-pit Hill, in Derby, being the
stock-in-trade of Messrs. John and Christopher Heath, of Derby,
bankrupts,” was advertised to take place by auction at the King’s
Head Inn, Derby. The works were carried on for a year or two by the
assignees of Messrs. Heath, but in 1782 “a lease of the Pot Works
situate on Cock-pit Hill, in Derby, twelve years after which have yet
to come, and unexpired, at Lady Day next, at the yearly rent of £6, and
the lessee has a right by the lease to take away the buildings (except
only leaving a fence-wall), and except a barn that was built on the
premises before the lease was granted,” was advertised for sale by
auction, along with other property, by the Heaths, “at the house of Mr.
George Wallis (being the New Inn, in Derby), on Tuesday, 12th March.”
The lease, however, does not seem to have found a purchaser, for in
the _Derby Mercury_ of March, 1785, another sale is announced
“in Messrs. Heath’s bankruptcy,” in lots, of “the materials of some
buildings at the late Pot Works on Cock-pit Hill, in Derby, consisting
of brick, tile, and timber; also some old iron, old lead, Hopton stone,
a quantity of deal boards, and some lumber.”

Although these works were very extensive, and produced a large
quantity of goods of various kinds during the Heaths’ time, but few
specimens can, unfortunately, be correctly appropriated. This, of
course, is owing to the fact that no mark was used by the owners of
the works, and therefore, doubtless, scores of examples pass as “early
Staffordshire,” and as the productions of other places. Three or four
well-authenticated pieces, however, may be named. The first is a jug
in my own possession. It is of the “imitation of the Queen’s ware,”
alluded to in a previous page, and bears on one side, within a border
of foliage, the quaint and characteristic drinking inscription, “One
Pot more and then, why what then, why another Pot.” On the other side
and front, within one continuous border, is a blacksmith busy at his
forge, working the immense bellows with his left hand, and holding the
iron in the fire with his right; while in front is a youth standing by
the anvil waiting, as a “striker”; tools and other things lying about;
and the inscription, “Thos. Burton, Winster, 1778.” This jug was made
at the Cock-pit Hill Works, for Mr. Thomas Burton, a blacksmith, of
Winster, whose name it bears, and who is represented at his forge, and
from his family passed into my own hands. It is engraved, Fig. 43.

  [Illustration: Fig. 43.]

Another excellent example belonged to my friend, the late Mr. Lucas.
It is a teapot, of the same kind of ware, and bears on one side the
words, “Harper for ever fow play and now fair dealing”--probably in
commemoration of the contested election of 1768, when Sir Henry Harpur
was defeated by Godfrey Clarke, Esq.


                             DERBY CHINA.

It is no little thing to say of Derby that the town in which the
silk manufacture of England first took its rise--for here the first
silk-mill ever built in this kingdom was erected by John Lombe; in
which the cotton trade made its first gigantic stride--for here
Arkwright and Strutt completed their invention for spinning, and
within a few miles erected the first cotton-mill in England; in which
the hosiery trade was first brought to perfection--for here Strutt
invented his famed “Derby Ribbed Stocking Machine,” and carried on his
manufacture of those articles; and in which many other branches of
manufacture have also had their rise--should likewise have been one of
the few places, and one of the _first_, in which the manufacture of
porcelain was matured, and in which the biscuit was first invented.
But so it is, and it is no little for Derby to be proud of, that
these branches of industry, which are among the most important in
the kingdom, should have had their birth, and in their infancy been
carefully nurtured, within its boundaries. The stories of Lombe and his
silk, Arkwright and Strutt and their cotton, and Jedediah Strutt and
his stockings, have been often told, and will bear telling again and
again; but that of Duesbury and his china has never been fully told,
and it was only by the most laborious research that I was enabled,
in 1862, to tell it, and to show to what an extent the manufacture,
under the care of three generations of one family, was carried. That
information I now, after many years of patient research, considerably
amplify. Alas! that so important, so beautiful a branch of Art should
ever have been allowed to decay in the town by which it has so long
been fostered.

One of the earliest printed notices of the Derby China Works occurs in
a scarce old book, “A Short Tour in the Midland Counties of England
performed in the summer of 1772, together with an account of a similar
excursion undertaken September, 1774.” It is as follows:--

   “The manufacture of porcelain employs, in all, near a hundred
   men and boys; several of the painters earn a guinea and a half
   per week. Mr. Duesbury (who has also bought the manufactory at
   Chelsea) is every day bringing the art nearer to that perfection
   at which it has arrived in other countries. Derby porcelain is
   at present by no means contemptible: figures and other ornaments
   are among their most capital articles. Here is also a pottery,
   and I was showed an imitation of the Queen’s ware, but it does
   not come up to the original, the produce of Staffordshire.”

In the “Poll Book” of 1775, when Christopher Heath was Mayor of Derby,
the following names occur:--

    Bakewell, Thomas, Derby, Pot-man.
    Dewsberry, William, Derby, China-man.
    Hill, Joseph, Derby, China-man.
    Needham, Henry, Derby, Pipe-maker.
    Simpson, Moses, Derby, Potter.
    Strong, Benjamin, Derby, Pipe-maker.
    Wood, William, London, China-man.
    Withers, Robert, Rotherham, Potter.
    Mosley, Thomas, Derby, Potter.

Bray, who wrote his “Tour” in the year 1777, says, speaking of Derby:--

   “The china manufactory is not less worthy of notice. Under
   the care of Mr. Duesberry it does honour to this country.
   Indefatigable in his attention, he has brought the gold and blue
   to a degree of beauty never before obtained in England, and the
   drawing and coloring of the flowers are truly elegant. About
   one hundred [this number is in his second edition corrected to
   seventy] hands are employed in it, and happily many, very young,
   are enabled to earn a livelihood in the business.”

Dr. Johnson visited the Derby China Works in 1777, and the following is
Boswell’s note on the visit:--

   “When we arrived at Derby Dr. Butter accompanied us to see the
   manufactory of China there. I admired the ingenuity and delicate
   art with which a man fashioned clay into a cup, a saucer, or
   a teapot, while a boy turned round a wheel to give the mass
   rotundity. I thought this as excellent in its species of power
   as making good verses in its species. Yet I had no respect
   for this potter. Neither, indeed, has a man of any extent of
   thinking for a mere verse-maker, in whose numbers, however
   perfect, there is no poetry, no mind. The china was beautiful;
   but Dr. Johnson justly observed it was too dear; for that he
   could have vessels of silver of the same size, as cheap as what
   were here made of porcelain.”

Pilkington, in his “View of the Present State of Derbyshire,” published
in 1789, says:--

   “About forty years ago the manufacture of porcelain was begun
   by the late Mr. Duesbury. This ingenious artist brought it
   to such perfection as, in some respects, to equal the best
   foreign china. The ornamental part of the business was at first
   almost solely attended to. But the foreign demand being much
   interrupted by the last war, the proprietor turned his thoughts
   to the manufacture of useful porcelain. At this work a very
   rich and elegant dessert service, consisting of one hundred
   and twenty pieces, was lately made for His Royal Highness the
   Prince of Wales. The number of hands at present employed by Mr.
   Duesbury is seventy-two, and the manufacture is in a flourishing
   state.”

William Hutton, the historian of his native town and of Birmingham, who
wrote his “History of Derby” in 1791, says:--

   “Porcelain began about the year 1750. There is only one
   manufactory, which employs about seventy people. The clay is not
   of equal fineness with the foreign, but the workmanship exceeds
   it. The arts of drawing and engraving have much improved within
   these last thirty years. The improvements of the porcelain have
   kept pace with these. They adhere to nature in their designs,
   to which the Chinese have not attained. A dessert service of
   one hundred and twenty pieces was recently fabricated here for
   the Prince of Wales. The spot upon which this elegant building
   stands, which is internally replete with taste and utility, was
   once the freehold of my family. It cost £35, but the purchaser,
   my grandfather’s brother, being unable to raise more than £28,
   mortgaged it for £7. Infirmity, age, and poverty, obliged him
   to neglect the interest, when, in 1743, it fell into the hands
   of my father as heir-at-law, who, being neither able nor anxious
   to redeem it, conveyed away his right to the mortgagee for a
   guinea.”

And again, in his MS. “History of the Hutton Family,” 1799,[8] he says,
speaking of John Hutton:--

   “He was the man who purchased the house east of St. Mary’s
   Bridge, now the China Works, for £35, but being master of only
   £28, mortgaged the premises to Mr. Crompton, a banker, for
   the other seven. He becoming old and poor, and inheriting the
   supineness of the Hutton family, suffered the trifling interest
   to remain unpaid till the mortgagee seized the premises.
   The freehold in 1743 fell into the hands of my father, as
   heir-at-law, who assigned over his interest to Mr. Crompton for
   a guinea.”

The manufactory was situated on the Nottingham Road, near St. Mary’s
Bridge, in a locality then named Suthrick, or Southwark. On its site,
in 1845–6, the Roman Catholic nunnery of St. Marie, designed by Pugin,
was erected, but this has now, like the China Works, become “a thing
of the past”--the nunnery having been purchased by the Midland Railway
Company, and taken down in 1863. Hutton’s remark as to this site being
his patrimony, is very curious, and adds an increased interest to the
locality. The very premises he speaks of were those first occupied for
the making of porcelain, and, curiously enough, they were opposite to
Lombe’s silk-mill, from which they were divided by the road and the
broad expanse of water of the River Derwent.

It is generally believed that in 1750, perhaps a little earlier, the
manufacture of china first sprang into existence in Derby--about a year
or so before the works at Worcester were established; and there is a
tradition that the first maker was a Frenchman, who lived in a small
house in Lodge Lane, and who modelled and made small articles in china,
principally animals--cats, dogs, lambs, sheep, &c.--which he fired in
a pipe-maker’s oven in the neighbourhood, belonging to a man named
Woodward. There were, at this time, as I have shown, some pot works on
Cock-pit Hill, which afterwards belonged to Alderman Heath, a banker;
and the productions of this French refugee, or rather son of a French
refugee, having attracted notice, an arrangement was made between him
and Heath and Duesbury, by which the manufacture of porcelain was to
be carried on jointly. This man’s name, to whom I take it belongs
the absolute honour of commencing the Derby China Works, was Andrew
Planché; and I am enabled to arrive at this conclusion by means of a
draft of a deed now in my possession, by which a partnership for ten
years was entered into by the three already named. In this arrangement
I apprehend Planché found the knowledge of mixing bodies and glazes,
Heath the money (£1,000), and Duesbury the will, ability, and skill to
carry out the scheme. These articles of agreement are as follows:--

   “ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT between John Heath of Derby in the County
   of Derby Gentleman, Andrew Planche of y^e same Place China Maker
   & W^m Duesberry of Longton in y^e County of Stafford Enamellor.
   Made and enter’d into the 1_{st} of Jan_{y} 1756.

   “FIRST IT IS AGREED by y^e said John Heath Andrew Planche &
   W^m Duesberry to be Copartners together as well in y^e Art
   of making English China as also in buying and selling of all
   sorts of Wares belonging to y^e Art of making China w^{ch} said
   Copartnership is to continue between them from the Date of these
   Presents for & during y^e Term of Ten years from thence & then
   fully to be compleated & ended And to that end He y^e said John
   Heath hath y^e day of y^e date of these Presents deliver’d in
   as a Stock y^e sum of One Thousand Pounds to be used & employ’d
   in Common between them for y^e carrying on y^e s^d Art of
   making China Wares And that one third share of Profits arising
   therefrom It is mutually agreed between all y^e s^d parties
   shall be receiv’d by & paid to y^e said John Heath till y^e
   said Prin^l Sum of £1000 be paid in ALSO it is agreed between
   y^e s^d parties to these Presents that y^e s^d Copartners shall
   not at any time hereafter use or follow y^e Trade aforesaid
   or any other Trade whatsoever during y^e s^d Term to their
   private Benefit and advantage. And also that y^e s^d Copartners
   shall during y^e said Term pay and discharge equally and
   proportionably between them all expenses they shall be at in
   managing y^e Art and Trade aforesaid[F1: period?] And also
   that all Gain or Profit that shall arise from y^e Art & Trade
   aforesaid during y^e said Term shall be divided between them y^e
   s^d Copartners Share and Share alike And likewise that all such
   Losses as shall happen by bad Debts Ill Commodities or otherwise
   shall be borne equally between them AND it is further agreed by
   y^e s^d Parties that there shall be kept during y^e s^d Term
   Just & True Books of Accounts to w^{ch} s^d Books any of y^e s^d
   Copartners shall have free access without Interruption of y^e
   other AND it is further agreed that at any time hereafter at y^e
   request of y^e said John Heath New Articles shall be made & an
   additional Term of years not less than Ten shall be added with
   such alterations and additions as may be found necessary AND
   that y^e said Copartners shall from time to time communicate to
   each other every Secret of y^e said Art AND that y^e said John
   Heath shall have it in his power to appoint any other Person to
   Act for him if he should chuse so to do w^{ch} Person shall be
   as fully impowered to Act with regard to all Covenants herein
   contained as y^e s^d John Heath himself. WITNESS OUR HANDS the
   Day & Year above written.”

These articles are not signed, and as in no instance which has come
under my notice the name of Planché again appears--and as I can only
trace the firm as that of “Duesbury and Heath”--I fear one is driven to
the inference that the usual fate of clever men awaited Andrew Planché,
and that when his knowledge was fully imparted, he was, from some
cause or other, discarded by those who had taken him in hand. At all
events, this is the only instance in which his name appears in any of
the papers connected with the works which I have examined. Of Planché,
however, whom I was the first to discover and note in 1862, but who,
despite all I had written, was spoken of by Mr. A. Wallis, eight years
later, as “an apocryphal French refugee,”[9] I am enabled to give some
additional particulars.

Andrew Planché was one of the five sons of Paul Planché, a French
refugee, by his first wife, Marie Anne Fournier, also a refugee, whom
he married in 1723. Andrew was born on the 14th, and baptized on the
24th, of March, 1727–8, and his youngest brother was Jacques Planché
(born in 1734), who married his cousin (the only daughter of Antoine
Planché by his wife Mary, daughter of Herr Abraham Thomas and his wife
Catherine), and was father of my old and valued friend, J. R. Planché,
F.S.A., the well-known dramatist and antiquary. This fact I brought to
his knowledge in 1862, and again when he was writing his interesting
“Recollections,” in which he has embodied some of the information I
supplied him with. Through the re-marriage of their father, the two
boys, Andrew and Jacques, had early to shift for themselves; the latter
made his way to Geneva, where he learned the business of watch-making,
and the former, I believe, went into Saxony, and there learned the art
of making porcelain at Dresden. How he came to Derby is at present a
mystery, but he was there at all events as early as, if not earlier
than, 1751. This is proved, as I shall presently show, by the birth of
one of his sons. In 1751 he would be 23 years of age, and was living
in the parish of St. Alkmund, in Derby. The following entries are
extracted from the parish register of St. Alkmund’s:--

    1751. Sept. 21. Baptized Paul Edmund, the son of Andrew Planché and
            Sarah his wife.
    1754. 12 Oct. Bap. James, the son of Andrew Planché and Sarah his
            wife.
    1754. Dec. 10. Buried James, the son of Andrew Planché and Sarah
            his wife.
    1756. March 4. Bap. James, the bastard son of Andrew Planché and
            Margaret Burroughs.
    1756. July 3. Bap. William, the son of Andrew Planché and Sarah
            his wife.

That Andrew Planché was not very strict in his morals is revealed by
these extracts, which show that in 1756 he had two sons baptised within
four months of each other, the first by a young woman named Margaret
Burroughs, and the second by his wife. This was the year, 1756, in
which the articles of agreement were drawn up. What became of Planché
after he left Derby is not known. He appears to have been a very
erratic individual, and his whereabouts uncertain. He was living at
Bath at the ripe age of 76, in 1804, and died there soon afterwards. At
all events, I have proof that he was in Derby eight years--how much
longer I know not--and I have also, as will be seen, indisputable proof
that William Duesbury had no connection with Derby till 1755–6, the
date of the deed I have printed above.

When Duesbury, whether in conjunction with Planché and Heath or not,
commenced business, it appears to have been in the small premises which
had not long before been relinquished for a guinea by the father of
William Hutton; and in them was thus commenced, in a very small way,
that manufacture of porcelain which afterwards grew to so immense an
extent. In the year 1756 the draft of agreement was drawn up, and the
ware made at the manufactory must soon have found a ready sale, for
in the course of a very few years Mr. Duesbury was carrying on a good
trade, had a London house for the sale of his productions, and became a
thriving and well-to-do man.

William Duesbury was of Longton Hall, in the county of Stafford,
and was the son of William Duesbury, currier, of Cannock, in the
same county, who in 1755, as is evidenced by the original deed in
my possession, made over to him his household furniture, leather,
implements of trade, and other effects, on condition that he should
find him “during the term of his natural life, good and sufficient
meat, drink, washing, and lodging, wearing apparel, and all other
necessaries whatsoever.” The following is a verbatim copy of this
curious deed, from the original. It is fully stamped, signed, and
attested, and runs as follows:--

   “THIS INDENTURE made the Twenty-seventh day of September in
   the twenty-ninth Year of the reign of King George the second
   over Great Britain and so forth and in the Year of our Lord
   One Thousand Seven Hundred and fifty-five BETWEEN William
   Duesbury of Cannock in the County of Stafford Currier of the
   one part and William Duesbury of Longton Hall in the Parish
   of Stoke-upon-Trent in the said County of Stafford Son of the
   said William Duesbury of the other part WITNESSETH that for
   and in Consideration of the natural Love and affection which
   he the said William Duesbury hath and beareth to the said
   William Duesbury the younger And of the Covenant or Agreement
   hereinafter contained on the part and behalf of the said William
   Duesbury the younger to be done and performed and of the Sum
   of Five Shillings of lawful British Money to the said William
   Duesbury in hand paid by the said William Duesbury the younger
   at or before the execution of these presents the receipt whereof
   is hereby acknowledged He the said William Duesbury Hath given
   granted bargained and sold and by these presents DOTH give grant
   bargain and sell unto the said William Duesbury the younger All
   and singular the Household Goods Leather Implements of Trade
   and all other the goods Chattles and Personal Estate of him the
   said William Duesbury situate and being at Cannock aforesaid or
   elsewhere in the said County of Stafford and every of them and
   every part thereof And all the Estate right title Interest &
   property claim and demand whatsoever both in Law and Equity of
   the said William Duesbury of in or unto the same every or any
   part thereof TO HAVE AND TO HOLD take retain and enjoy the said
   Household Goods Leather Implements of Trade and every of them
   And all other the goods Chattles and personal Estate above given
   granted bargained and sold or mentioned and intended so to be
   with their appurtenances unto the said William Duesbury the
   younger his Extors. admors. & assigns from henceforth absolutely
   and for ever to his and their own Use and benefit And the said
   William Duesbury for himself his Extors. & admors. doth covenant
   promise and grant to and with the said William Duesbury the
   younger his Extors. admors. & assigns that he the said William
   Duesbury his Extors. & admors or some of them All and singular
   the said Goods Chattles and personal Estate above given granted
   bargained and sold or mentioned & intended so to be to the said
   William Duesbury the younger his Extors. & admors. against
   all Men shall and will warrant & for ever defend And the said
   William Duesbury hath put the said William Duesbury the younger
   into possion. of all & singular the said Goods and Chattles by
   delivering him one Pewter Plate in the name of all and singular
   the said Goods and Chattles at the execution of these presents
   AND THIS INDENTURE FURTHER WITNESSETH And the said William
   Duesbury the younger in Consideration of the Premises for
   himself his Heirs Extors. & admors. doth covenant promise grant
   and agree to and with the said William Duesbury his Extors. &
   admors. That he the said William Duesbury the younger his Heirs
   Extors. and admors. or some of them shall and will from time to
   time and at all times hereafter find and provide for the said
   William Duesbury during the term of his natural Life good &
   sufficient meat drink washing and Lodging wearing apparel and
   all other necessaries whatsoever at the proper Costs and Charges
   of him the said William Duesbury the younger his Heirs Extors.
   Admors. or assigns IN WITNESS whereof the said Parties to these
   presents have hereunto set their Hands and Seals the day & year
   first above written.

    Sealed and delivered }                WILLIAM DUESBURY.[circle]
    in the presence of   }

    MARY KNIGHT.
    JO: KNIGHT.                           WILLIAM DUESBURY.[circle]

I next find William Duesbury, the enameller, of Longton, entering into
partnership with Heath and Planché on the first January in the year
following his executing this deed for the maintenance of his father;
and entries in the family Bible prove that at this time he removed to
Derby, to carry on his newly-acquired business “in ye art of making
English china, as also in buying and selling of all sorts of wares
belonging to ye art of making china.” The partnership deed bearing
date the first of January, 1756, shows that the negotiations must have
been made in the previous year, 1755, and as the deed of gift from his
father is dated September 27th of that year, it is evident that the one
was consequent on the other, and that the arrangement with his father
was the result of his determination to come to Derby. The father lived
until 1768, and died and was buried in Derby. In the parish register is
the entry, “1768. Buried, Mr. Duesbrie, March 17.”

William Duesbury was born on the 7th of September, 1725, and married
Sarah James, of Shrewsbury (who was born on the 12th of August, 1724).
In 1755 he was residing at Longton, as an enameller on china ware, &c.,
and in 1756 removed to Derby to carry on the porcelain works there. By
his wife Sarah, who died on the 14th of September, 1780, and was buried
at St. Alkmund’s Church, Derby, he had several children. These were, so
far as I have been able to ascertain, William, born in London in 1752,
and died there in infancy; Anne, born at Longton, Oct. 3, 1754, who
became the wife of Richard Egan, linendraper, of London, and afterwards
china, earthenware, and glass dealer, of Bath; Mary, born in London,
in 1753, but baptised at St. Alkmund’s, Derby, who died in infancy;
another Mary, born at Derby, Nov., 1756, and died in 1783; Sarah, born
in 1758, and died an infant; another Sarah, born in 1759, and buried
in 1767; Dorothea, born in 1761, who married the Rev. John Chawner, of
Church Broughton, in 1786; William, born in 1763, who succeeded his
father; and James, born in 1765, who, after an erratic and evidently
misunderstood and unfortunate life, died in obscurity. Mr. Duesbury
himself, after a long and useful life, in the course of which he not
only established the Derby China Works, but became the purchaser of
those of Chelsea, Bow, Vauxhall, and Kentish Town, died at Derby,
and was buried at St. Alkmund’s Church, in that town, on the 2nd of
November, 1786.

William Duesbury, son and successor of the last named, was born at
Derby, and baptised at St. Alkmund’s Church there, March 1, 1763. On
the 4th of January, 1787, he married Elizabeth, daughter of William
Edwards, Esq., solicitor, of Derby, the lady having three days before
completed her twentieth year. By her he had issue three sons--William,
who succeeded him; Nathaniel, who died in 1809, aged 19; and Frederick,
who became an eminent physician in London--and two daughters, viz.,
Sarah, who remained unmarried, and died in 1875; and Anne Elizabeth,
who became the wife of Francis Jessop, Esq., solicitor, of Derby. So
far it has been necessary to summarise this bit of family genealogy,
but the remainder will form a part of the thread of the history of the
works.

The manufacture of china under the first William Duesbury must have
rapidly risen into eminence, for in 1763, in an account of “goods sent
to London,” no less than forty-two large boxes appear at one time to
have been despatched to the metropolis, and the proceeds, I presume,
of the sale of a part of them, on the 2nd of May, in that year,
amounted to no less a sum than £666 17_s._ 6_d._ It is very
interesting, at this early period of the art, to be enabled to say of
what varieties of goods the consignment to London consisted, and I
therefore give the list of contents of some of the boxes entire, and
also a few items from others. I do this the more readily because it has
been recently said by the writer to whom I have already alluded, “We
doubt very much whether the higher sorts of fine porcelain (figures,
vases, &c.) were made upon the Nottingham Road until the purchase of
the Chelsea Works in 1769 and the commencement of what is called the
Chelsea-Derby period, which lasted until 1785 or 1786.”

   Box No. 41 contained--

     8 Large Flower Jarrs, at 21_s._
     3 Large Ink Stands, at 42_s._
     1 Small ditto, at 24_s._
     4 Large Britanias, at 36_s._
     6 Second-sized Huzzars, at 12_s._
     4 Large Pidgeons, at 7_s._
    12 Small Rabbets, at 2_s._
    12 Chickens, at 2_s._
    16 Small Baskets, at 2_s._ 6_d._

   Box No. 31--

     4 Large Quarters, at 40_s._
     4 Shakespeares, at 42_s._
     6 Miltons, at 42_s._
    24 Bucks, on Pedestals, at 2_s._ 6_d._

   Box No. 29--

     4 Large Quarters, at 40_s._
     2 Jupiters, at 68_s._
     2 Junos.
     5 Ledas, at 36_s._
     1 Europa, at 36_s._
     2 Bird-catchers, at 10_s._ 6_d._
    12 Sixth-sized Solid Baskets.
    18 Second-sized Boys, at 1_s._ 6_d._

   Box No.11--

    24 Enammelled, round, fourth-size, open-worked Baskets.
    12 Blue ditto.
    12 Open-worked Spectacle Baskets.
     9 Second-size Sage-leaf boats.

There were also, of various sizes, blue fluted boats, Mosaic boats,
sage-leaf boats, potting pots, caudle cups, blue strawberry pots,
fig-leaf sauce boats, octagon fruit plates, vine-leaf plates, coffee
cups, flower vases, standing sheep, feeding sheep, cats, sunflower
blows, pedestals, honeycomb jars, coffee pots, blue guglets and basins
to ditto; butter tubs, Chelsea jars, tea pots, honeycomb pots, figures
of Mars and Minerva, sets of the Elements, Spanish shepherds, Neptune,
the Muses, bucks, tumblers, roses, Jupiter, Diana, boys, garland
shepherd, Spaniards, Chelsea-pattern candlesticks, Dresden ditto, jars
and beakers, polyanthus pots, &c., &c.

It is worthy of note that at this time, although much within the ten
years stipulated for the partnership, the name of William Duesbury
alone usually occurs. It is true that in some instances “Duesbury
and Co.,” and “Duesbury and Heath,” are met with, but these are the
exception. The works at Derby continued now rapidly to extend, and
fresh articles and subjects were being continually added to those
already made. The best available talent was got together, apprentices
were taken to the modelling, the painting, the making or “repairing”
of china, and other parts of the manufacture, and it was soon found
advisable to have a regular warehouse in London.

The mark used in the earliest days of the works is not certain, but I
believe, and I have reason for that belief, that it was simply the
letter D, which, would stand either for “Duesbury” or for “Derby;”
probably in gold. The figures and groups, too, were numbered and
registered for reproduction.

On the 17th of August, 1769, Mr. Duesbury arranged for the purchase of
the Chelsea China Works, their purchase being completed on the 5th of
February, 1770, when a payment of £400, in part of the purchase-money,
was made by Mr. Duesbury, who thus, as the proprietor of the Derby and
the Chelsea Works, became the largest manufacturer in the kingdom.[10]
The history of the Chelsea Works has already been fully given in the
first volume of this work, and therefore it is only necessary here to
say, that in 1862, in my paper on the Derby China Works, in the _Art
Journal_, I was for the first time enabled to state the fact that
Mr. Duesbury purchased “the Chelsea Porcelain Manufactory, and its
appurtenances and lease thereof,” on the 5th of February, 1770, and
that it was covenanted to be assigned over to him on or before the 8th
of that month; the date of the arrangement to purchase being August
17th, 1769. For some few years, then, Mr. Duesbury carried on both
establishments, and subsequently removed the models and some of the
workmen to Derby, where also he removed such of the models, &c., from
Bow, which had likewise come into his possession. The purchase of the
Chelsea Works soon entailed upon him the commencement of some heavy law
proceedings which lasted many years. The cause of these proceedings
was the attempt at recovery of a quantity of goods claimed by Duesbury
as a part of his purchase, being goods made by Spremont, and of his
material, but which were afterwards sold, it was said, wrongfully, by
Francis Thomas, to a person named Burnsall. The action was commenced
in 1770, and in 1771 Mr. Spremont, the old proprietor of the Chelsea
Works, died. The proceedings, however, continued for several years.

During the time Mr. Duesbury carried on the Chelsea Works, from
February 1770 to 1773, the “weekly bills” are now in my possession,
and are particularly interesting as showing the nature of the articles
then made, and the names of the painters and others employed, and the
amount of wages they earned. The following examples will be read with
interest. The first I give is quite one of the early ones--of the same
month in which the works were delivered over to Duesbury:--


   1770. _A Weekly Bill at Chelsea from the 24 of March to the 31._

                                                  £  _s._ _d._
    Barton, 6 days att 3_s._ 6_d._                1    1    0
    Boyer, 6 days att 3_s._ 6_d._                 1    1    0
    3 dozen of Seals of the Lambs, made overtime  0    3    6
    3 dozen of Lyons, ditto                       0    3    6
    Roberts, 6 days att 2_s._ 6_d._               0   15    0
    Piggot, 6 days att 1_s._ 9_d._                0   10    6
    Ditto, Taking Care of the Horse on Sunday     0    1    6
    Inglefield, 6 days at 1_s._ 8_d._             0   10    0
                                                 ------------
                                                 £4    6    0


                   Work done this Week at Chelsea--

    6 Large Ornement Pedistols for the Grand Popore.
    5 Large Popore Perfume Pots to Ditto.
    1 Square Perfume Pot Deckarated with heads of the 4 seasons.
    Roberts, Making Cases hall the week.
    Piggot, Working the hors in the Mill, and fettling of rims.
    Inglefield, Pounding of the glass, and cutting of wood.

       Recd. of Mr. Duesbury in full of all Demands for self and
                              the a Bove.

                                                     RICHD. BARTON.


        1770. _A Weekly Bill at Chelsea from Decr. 1 to the 8._

                                                          £   _s._ _d._
    Boarman,[11] 6 days att 5_s_ 3_d._                    1   11    6
    Wolliams, 6 days att 4_s._ 6_d._                      1    7    0
    Jenks, 6 days att 3_s._ 6_d._                         1    1    0
    Boyer, 6 days att 3_s._ 6_d._                         1    1    0
    Barton, 6 days att 3_s._ 6_d._                        1    1    0
    Roberts, 3 days att 2_s._ 6_d._                       0    7    6
    Piggott, 6 days att 1_s._ 9_d._                       0   10    6
    Ditto, Sunday, taking care of the Horse               0    1    6
    Inglefield, 6 days att 1_s._ 8_d._                    0   10    0
    Overtime by Barton and Boyer, 10 Globe Cover Jarrs    0   10    0
    72 Seals painted in Mottords[12] by Boarman and
      Wolliams                                            0    7    6
    42 Seals, painted by Jinks at 2_d._ each, figures     0    7    0
    A Letter from Darby                                   0    0    5
    2 Tons of fine clay Shipping to Darby                 2    7    0
    And 1 Ton to Chelsea of Corse                         0   17    0
    A Letter to Darby                                     0    0    1
    Tax’s of the Factory                                  2    0    3
    Turpentine for the Painters                           0    0    6
    Peaper for the Use of the factory                     0    0    4
                                                        -------------
                                                        £14    1    1
                             Deduct for 2 Tun Clay[13]    2    7    0
                                                        -------------
                                                        £11   14    1

    Rec. of Mr. Duesbury in full of all demands for Self and the a Bove.

    _Exd. and Ent._

                                                      RICHD. BARTON.

Amongst other interesting entries from week to week in the bills, I
have chosen a few examples to illustrate the kind of work then carried
on in this factory.

                                                          £   _s._ _d._
    Paid for the Plaister Mould
      from Darby, the 9 of August                         0    0    6
    Paid for a box from Darby                             0    0    6
    Overwork by Barton and Boyer, 2 Junquill Beakers      0    4    0
    And 1 Vincent Pattern Perfume Pot                     0    1    6
    Seals painted by Jinks, 33 Lambs 1½_d._               0    4    1½
    33 Covers Painted Overtime by Jinks at 1½_d._ each    0    4    1⅓
    Cord[14] for the Kilns                                1   17    4
    Overtime by Boyer and Barton, 5 Sweet Meat Basons
      at 1_s._ each                                       0    5    0
    ----4 hart shaped Perfume Pots with handles, at
      1_s._ 3_d._ each                                    0    5    0
    1 Cupid Forgin Harts at 1_s._ 3_d._                   0    1    3
    Overtime, Painting by Jinks 2 dozen of Tom titts
      at 1½_d._ each                                      0    3    0
    Seals made overtime 3 dozen Chineas Men with a Bird   0    3    6
    3 dozen Cupids as a Backus                            0    3    6
    24 Strawberry Compotiers made with the Darby clay.
    1 dozen and 6 Cupid Booted and Spurd                  0    1    9
    1 dozen and 6 Harts on a Cushin                       0    1    9
    1 dozen and 6 Cupid as a Doctor                       0    1    9
    1 dozen and 6 Turks a Smokin                          0    1    9
    1 dozen and 6 Shepherds Shearing of Sheep             0    1    9
    12 Tooth Picks with Head of Turk and Companions,
      painted with emblematick Mottoes, ditto at
      1_s._ 6_d._                                         0   18    0

Examples of this kind[15] could be multiplied to any extent, but to
bring the extracts a little later down in date, I shall content myself
by giving the “weekly bill at Chelsea from June 19 to the 26, 1773,” to
show that the same hands, with the addition of a modeller named Gauron,
were still employed:--

                                                      £   _s._ _d._
    Gauron, 5¾ days at 8_s._ 9_d._                    2   10    3½
    Boreman, 5¼ days at 5_s._ 3_d._                   1    7    7
    Woolams, 5½ days at 4_s._ 6_d._                   1    4    9
    Jenks, 6 days at 3_s._ 6_d._                      1    1    0
    Snowden, 6 days at 3_s._ 6_d._                    1    1    0
    Boyer, 6 days at 3_s._ 6_d._                      1    1    0
    Barton, 6 days at 3_s._ 6_d._                     1    1    0
    Roberts, 6 days at 2_s._ 6_d._                    1   15    0
    Painting, overwork, Smelling Bottles of boys
      catching Squirrel at 1_s._ 3_d._                0    2    6
    2 Ditto, with a Bird’s Nest at 1_s._ each         0    2    0
    1 Ditto, Piping with a Dog at 1_s._               0    1    0
    1 Ditto, Double Dove                              0    1    0
    Mottoing 60 Seals at 1¼_d._ each                  0    6    3
    Modling Clay                                      0    0    6
    A Parsel                                          0    0    2
    A Letter                                          0    0    1
                                                     ------------
                                                    £10   15    1¾

    Recd. of Mr. Duesbury in full of all demands for Self and the a Bove.

                                                        RICHD. BARTON.

Before Mr. Duesbury purchased the Chelsea works the mark of that
manufactory was an anchor, [Illustration: Fig. 44.] and to this Mr.
Duesbury added the letter D; and the mark now known as distinguishing
the “Derby Chelsea” ware was thus--generally in gold. Examples of this
period are of comparative rarity, and are eagerly sought after by
collectors.

  [Illustration: Fig. 45.]

In 1772, in the very curious MS. “Lists of Gent., &c., in Derby, 1772,”
in my own possession (a list prepared for official purposes over
elections), are the following entries under “Southwark,” as that part
of Derby was called. In one:--

    Duesbury, Mr. W^m                 China Manufacturer.
    Steer, Mr. John                   A^t to China Manufactory.
    Wood, Mr. W^m                                Do.

and in the other list:--

    Mr. Duesbury                     China Manufacturer.
    Mr. W^m Wood                     Clerk to Do.
    Mr. John Steer                        Do.

In June, 1773, Mr. Duesbury took the lease of premises (late the Castle
Tavern) in Bedford Street, Covent Garden, for a warehouse for his
Derby and Chelsea ware, and here, with this William Wood as his agent
(afterwards succeeded by J. Lygo), he exhibited and kept a large stock
of his manufactures, and carried on, in conjunction with his two works,
a very thriving and lucrative trade. Here he issued a “List of the
principal additions made this year to the new invented Groups, Jars,
Vases, Urns, Beakers, Cups, Chalices, &., of Mr. Duesbury’s Derby and
Chelsea Manufactory of Porcelaines, Biscuits, and China Ware, both
Ornamental and Useful.” This “list” is printed in small quarto. Among
the articles enumerated, one hundred and twenty-three in number, the
following will be sufficient to show their beautiful and elaborate
nature, and the amount of labour and artistic skill which they
exhibited:--

   “1. Their present majesties, the king and queen, and royal
   family, in three grouped pieces of biscuit. The centre piece
   represents the king in a Vandyke dress, on a blue and gold
   basement, supported by four lions leaning on an altar richly
   ornamented in blue and gold, with hanging trophies of the polite
   arts and sciences. The crown, _munde_, and sceptre reposing on a
   cushion, of crimson, embroidered, fringed, and tapelled in gold.
   14 inches.

   “42. A large _beaker_, sky-blue ground spotted in white; two
   dolphins, lion footed, standing on white goats’ heads, form the
   two anses in crimson and white edged with gold, the mouth of
   the beaker and the top of the vase are furrowed with twisted
   crenures in white and gold; the zone of the top is adorned with
   golden lions, turned toward white and gold marks; the rim of the
   cup part is foliated and crenulated friese, white and gold, with
   detached patera, the pediment striped with gold in alternate
   triangles, the foot covered with gilt leaves; the pedestal in
   white and gold has four white sphinxes for angular supporters,
   over which runs a gold festoon fixed to the surbase; the whole,
   with the pedestals, 20 inches.

   “105. A white _gallon cask_, with gold edged hoops, adorned
   with four trophies of music emblems of love, in chiaro-oscuro,
   surmounted by a young coloured Bacchus, sitting on the bung
   tasting a grape, of which he holds a basket full between his
   legs, and a cup in his left hand, the barrel is made to turn
   round on a pivot fixed in an _ormolu_ pediment, a satyr’s mask
   holds an _ormolu_ cock in his mouth, which opens and shuts by a
   spring. 18 inches.”

The works at Chelsea were not finally discontinued until the year 1784,
when they were destroyed by Mr. Duesbury, the kilns and every part
of the work pulled down, and what was available sent down to Derby.
The removal of the kilns, and the work of demolition, was entrusted
to Robert Boyer, the painter, &c., the old and faithful servant whose
name appears in the “weekly bills” above given; and when his work was
done he removed to Derby at twenty-five shillings per week in place
of a guinea, with house rent free, and fire as heretofore.[16] It is
also worthy of remark that Mr. Duesbury purchased the Bow business, and
owned the pottery at Pedlar’s Acre, at Lambeth, the rents of which he
assigned in 1781.

  [Illustration: Fig. 46.]

Periodical sales of stock were held in London by Mr. Duesbury, and
judging by the catalogues of “Sales by Auction” by Messrs. Christie
and Ansell, of Pall Mall, and “Sales by Candle,” by Mr. Hunter, the
articles sent up for the purpose were excellent examples of the
manufacture, and just such as were likely to be sought after by the
traders--the “chinamen” of London. The descriptions of the goods were
of much the same character as in the “list” referred to, with this
addition, that in the late catalogues the price (the trade price
possibly) was attached to each article. I have by me the priced
catalogues of several years’ sales, and it is highly interesting to
examine them, and to see the prices the different articles realised
at the sales. They give, perhaps, one of the best insights into the
porcelain trade of that period of anything I have seen. A few items,
taken at random, from some of these catalogues, will be useful to
the collector. The “Catalogue of an elegant and extensive assortment
of Derby and Chelsea Porcelaine” for sale on May 10th, 1781, and
four following days, has a long and full title-page, and occupies
thirty-two octavo pages. The company were invited to this sale by
cards, of which the following is a copy:--

   “At Mess^{rs} Christie and Ansell’s great Room, next _Cumberland
   House, Pall Mall_, will be sold by Auction on _Tuesday_ next,
   the 7th of _May_ 1782, and the Four following Days, an elegant
   and extensive Assortment of the DERBY and CHELSEA PORCELAIN,
   consisting of TABLE and DESERT SERVICES, TEA and COFFEE
   EQUIPAGES, BISCUIT ORNAMENTS, &c., &c.

   “To be viewed on _Saturday_ the 4th of _May_, and till the Sale
   (Sunday excepted), which will begin each Day at 12 o’clock.

   “N.B.--Mr. _Duesbury_ flatters himself the Produce of his
   Manufactory this Year will be found far superior to any Thing
   he has ever yet exhibited, and therefore humbly hopes he shall
   experience the wonted generous Countenance of the Nobility, and
   his Friends in general, whose Patronage (with the highest Sense
   of Gratitude) he will be ever studious to deserve.”

The following are a few of the lots offered. It was a five days’ sale,
and there were 529 lots in all. The figures I have placed in brackets,
thus [     ] are the prices the lots realised at this sale:--

   A complete set of tea china, waved, shank’d, enamel’d with a
   border of green flowers and gold edge, 41 pieces. [£3 3s.]

   Six French-shape chocolate-cups and saucers, enamel’d with
   festoons of green husks and pink and gold border. [18s.]

   One small-size group representing Music, in biscuit. [21s.]

   One pair of element-groups representing Air and Water, and 4
   standing seasons, in ditto (biscuit). [£1 18s.]

   An elegant Etruscan-shape vase, enamel’d in compartments with a
   figure of Shenston, and fine blue ground striped with gold.

   One set of five beautiful vases, enamel’d in compartments with
   landscapes and figures, richly finished with green and gold.

   A beautiful dejune, enamel’d in compartments with Cupids and
   striped with gold.

   A beautiful large group of figures of the three Virtues, in
   biscuit. [30s.]

   A beautiful desert-service, enamel’d with coloured flowers and
   fine blue and gold leafage border, consisting of 24 plates, 2
   large oblong compotiers, 1 ditto with a foot, 2 heart-shape, 4
   round, and 4 square ditto, 1 pair cream-bowls, covers, stand,
   and spoons.

   One beautiful vase, enamel’d in compartments with a landscape on
   one side and Romeo and Juliet on the other, richly finished with
   chas’d and burnish’d gold.

   One pair of ewer-shape vases, enamel’d in compartments with
   figures and richly gilt.

   An elegant inkstand, fine blue and gold. [10s. 6d.]

   One group of Jason and Medea before Diana.

   One set of (three) vases, beautifully painted in compartments
   with jett figures, and richly finished with chas’d and burnish’d
   gold. [£7.]

   One pair of Etruscan-shape vases, enamel’d with trophies and
   figures richly gilt.

   A beautiful dejune, enamel’d with vases, &c., rich, finished
   with fine blue and gold. [63s.]

   Six caudle cups, covers and stands, peacock pattern, white and
   gold. [25s.]

   A superb and elegant pair of caudle cups, covers and stands,
   enamel’d in compartments with figures and striped with gold.

   One pair of small foxes, in biscuit. [10s.]

   A figure of Time and a set of the Seasons, enamel’d. [35s.]

   One small group representing Music, 1 pair Sportsman and
   Companion, 4 small groups, and 4 small flower vases, in biscuit.
   [£2 6s.]

   One pair of Dragon candlesticks, green and gold.

   A beautiful three-quart punch-bowl, enamel’d with flowers and
   rich blue and gold border [17s.]

   One superb and elegant vase with therms, beautifully enamel’d
   with figures, the Three Graces on one side and a landscape on
   the other, in compartments, enriched with chased and burnished
   gold, and 2 ewer-shape vases to match, figure of Virtue on one
   side and Prudence on the other.

   One pair of basket-work antique-handled vases, enamel’d with
   figures, Pomona and Prudence on one side and a landscape on the
   other, in compartments, gilt to match.

   One beautiful large group of two Virgins awaking Cupid, in
   biscuit. [42s.]

   One ditto to match of two Bacchants dressing Pan with a garland
   of flowers.

   One pair of beautiful groups representing Poetry and Music, in
   biscuit.

   One set of figures, the four quarters and four small groups, in
   biscuit. [30s.]

   One large punch-bowl, enamel’d with festoons of coloured flowers
   and gold edge. [12s.]

   One large perfume-vase, beautifully painted in figures in
   compartments representing Eneas meeting Venus before he enters
   Carthage, richly gilt.

   One pair of large beakers to match, enamel’d in compartments
   with figures, on one side Bacchus and Ariadne, and on the other
   Venus and Adonis, richly gilt.

   A very rich and beautiful compleat desert service, enamel’d
   with different vases, festoons of green husks, and fine blue
   and gold, consisting of 24 plates, 2 large oblong compotiers,
   1 ditto with a foot, 4 round, 2 heart-shape, 4 oval, 4 oblong
   ditto, and a pair of cream-bowls, covers, stands, and spoons.
   [£22 1s.]

   Four pierced desert flower-vases, 1 pair fitting figures, and 4
   shooting Cupids, in biscuit.

   One pair of fox-hunters’ cups.

   A very beautiful Seve-pattern compleat desert service, enamel’d
   with roses, fine mosaic border, richly finished with chased and
   burnish’d gold, consisting of 24 plates, 3 oblong compotiers, 2
   heart-shape, 4 round, 4 square, 4 small oblong ditto, and a pair
   cream-bowls, covers, stands, and spoons. [£25 4s.]

   One pair of sitting religious figures, in biscuit. [9s.]

   One pair Satyr-head drinking-mugs, enamell’d and gilt. [8s.]

   One beautiful figure of Shakespear, in biscuit, and fine blue
   and gold pedestal. [21s.]

   One pair large rummers, enamel’d with festoons of coloured
   flowers, and gilt. [6s. 6d.]

   Two large leaves, 4 small ditto, and one round fruit-dish. [13s.]

   One group of 3 boys playing at hazard, and one ditto of a
   galanter show, in biscuit.

   Six Egg-spoons, 6 artichoke-cups, and 6 asparagus-servers,
   enamel’d, fine blue and white. [9s.]

   One sett of 3 vases, enamel’d with birds and gilt.

   One large-size group representing Poetry and Music, in biscuit.
   [22s.]

   One pair of large gardeners, 2 pair of muses, and 4 small
   flower-vases in ditto.

   An elegant stand for different cheeses and butter, enamel’d with
   vazes and fine mazarine blue and gold (rivetted). [21s.]

   1 sett of 5 elegant jars, enamel’d in compartments with groups
   of natural flowers and fine blue and gold.

   A beautiful large group of 3 graces and 2 cupids, supposed to be
   crowning her Majesty with garland of flowers, in biscuit.

   One pair of element groups, 1 pair of large fruit and flower
   figures, and one pair figures representing earth and water, in
   ditto. [42s.]

   A neat chimney-piece embellished with composition ornaments.

   Six beautiful coffee or chocolate cups and saucers, enamel’d
   with Cupids, fine blue ring and gilt.

   A very rich and beautiful desert-service, enamel’d with roses
   and fine mazarine blue and gold border, consisting of 24 plates,
   2 large oblong compotiers, 1 ditto with a foot, 2 heart-shape,
   4 oval, 4 octagon, and 4 shell-shape ditto, and a pair of cream
   bowls, covers, stands, and spoons. [£28 7s.]

   One beautiful group of 2 Virgins awaking Cupid, and a ditto of
   2 bacchants dressing Pan with a garland of flowers, in biscuit.
   [£3 18s.]

   One superb and elegant vase with therms, beautifully enamel’d
   with figures of wisdom and Vigilance on one side, and a
   landscape on the other in compartments, and richly ornamented
   with fine blue and gold, 2 ewer-shape vases to match, figure of
   Virtue on one side and fortitude on the other, with landscape
   and fine blue and gold.

   One pair of elegant tripods richly ornamented with fine blue and
   gold.

   One pair of beautiful antique lamps.

   One beautiful vase, enamel’d in compartments, with a figure of
   rhetoric and a landscape enrich’d with gold stripes.

   Two Neptune-head drinking-mugs.

   One figure of Andromache weeping over the ashes of Hector, and
   one pair of Madona groups, in biscuit.

   A large dove-house ornamented with natural flowers and richly
   gilt.

   One large oval-shape vase and two egg-shape, enamel’d with
   Cupids gathering the vintage, richly finished with burnished
   gold.

   One pair of elegant figures, Bacchus and Ariadne, 1 pair
   sportsman and companion, and 1 pair harlequin and columbine, in
   biscuit. [37s.]

   One group of 4 Cupids, in biscuit. [17s.]

   Four pierced flower vases, 2 pair gardeners, and 1 pair small
   dancing groups in ditto. [34s.]

   A superb and elegant large vase with therms, beautifully
   enamel’d with figures of the three Graces on one side and a
   landscape on the other, 1 pair of ewer-shape vases to match,
   figure of Virtue and History on one side and landscapes on the
   other, in compartments, enrich’d with chased and burnished gold.

   One pair of Egg-shape vases to match, enamel’d with figures of
   Prudence and Rhetoric.

   Four small desert flower-vases, in biscuit. [9s.]

   A beautiful group of 4 Cupids, 2 pair of small music figures, 1
   pair French shepherds, and 4 small vases, in biscuit. [£2 3s.]

   One pair large dancing groups, in biscuit. [24s.]

   A pair of uncommonly large octagon jars (near 2 feet high)
   decorated with natural flowers and finely enamel’d with figures,
   landscapes, &c., richly ornamented with chased and burnish’d
   gold, the figures represent a votaress of Bacchus and Innocence
   washing her hands at an altar.

   Six breakfast basons and saucers, enamel’d with green festoons
   and gold edges.

   One pair of large perfume-vases, enamel’d with flowers,
   ornamented with dogs, rabbits, &c., and gilt.

   An elegant Seve-pattern complete desert-service, enamel’d with
   roses and rich mosaic and gold border, consisting of 3 dozen
   plates, 2 large oblong compotiers, 4 round, 2 heart-shape, 4
   large square, 4 small oblong, and one large ditto with a foot
   for the center, and a pair of cream-bowls, covers, stands, and
   spoons. [£30 9s.]

   One pair groups, the arts and sciences, and a pair large
   gardeners, in biscuit. [30s.]

   One superb and elegant large vase with therms, enamel’d in
   compartments with figures, the three Graces, enrich’d with
   chas’d burnish’d and gold. [£8 8s.]

   One pair of beautiful oval jars to match, the figures represent
   Apollo and Agrippina lamenting over the ashes of Germanicus. [£6
   6s.]

   One of pair small enamel’d foxes. [10s.]

   A pair of hares’ heads, enamel’d, after nature. [10s.]

   Three elegant vases, enamel’d with rose-coloured figures from
   Ovid, and enriched with gold. [£9 19s. 6d.]

   One pair large dogs, enamel’d.

   A desert-service, enamel’d with roses, festoons of green husks,
   and pink and gold border, consisting of 24 plates, 3 large
   oblong compotiers, 4 round, 2 heart-shape, and 4 small oblong
   ditto, and a pair of cream-bowls, covers, stands, and spoons.
   [£13 2s. 6d.]

   Six elegant ice cream cups, enamel’d with festoons of red husks,
   and fine blue and gold.

   Two pair of large boys riding on dolphin and fawn, in biscuit.

One of these sale catalogues, at the risk of occupying much space, I
here reprint entire, because I conceive nothing could more completely
show the character of the goods, ornamental as well as useful, which at
that time were the staple productions of the Derby works. It cannot,
I opine, but be of immense use to collectors in assisting them to
correctly appropriate and date their examples. The catalogue which
I now reprint (one of several years in my possession) is of folio
size, and occupies twelve pages. The selling prices are printed in the
catalogue; the prices realised at the sale, however, were not, on the
average, more than one-half the printed ones. The proceeds of the whole
sale was £276 4_s._ It is of the year 1785. The title-page is as
follows:--

   “_Four Months Promp._----CHINA, for SALE, by the CANDLE,
   at Mr. WILLIAM DUESBURY’S Warehouse, in _Bedford-Street,
   Covent-Garden,_ On _Wednesday_ the 9th, and _Thursday_ the
   10th of _March_, 1785, at Six of the Clock in the Afternoon,
   A very good ASSORTMENT of Derby Figures and Candlesticks,
   compleat Tea and Desert Services, Caudle and Chocolate Cups,
   &c. of the newest and best Patterns. To be viewed on _Monday_
   and _Tuesday_, and ‘till the Time of Sale. To be Sold by
   AUCTION by WILLIAM HUNTER, _Sworn Broker_, No. 59, _New
   Bond-Street_.--Printed by Joseph Good, Stationer, &c., No. 79,
   Fleet Street.”

At the back of the title are the conditions, thus:--

   “_Bedford-Street, Covent-Garden, March 9, 1785._--CONDITIONS OF
   THE SALE.--I. The Goods are all to be taken away without any
   Allowance at the Buyer’s Expence, on or before the 14th day of
   _March_, 1785, and paid for on delivery.--II. Buyer’s Notes,
   approved of by the proprietor, will be taken payable four Months
   after date.--III. The Proprietor will allow a discount of 2½
   _per Cent._ to those who chuse to pay ready money.--IV. Such
   goods as shall not be taken away as aforesaid, the Proprietor
   shall be at liberty to re-sell without further notice, either by
   public sale or private contract; and all losses attending such
   re-sale shall be made good by the respective Buyer or Buyers at
   this Sale.--V. If any dispute shall arise between any Bidders
   concerning any lot, such lot to be put up again.--VI. The Buyer
   to pay Six-pence per lot deposit, in order to bind the bargain,
   which is not returnable.”

Then follows:--

                           A CATALOGUE, &c.

    LOT.                                                   £ _s._ _d._
     1 A Tythe pig group, 1 pair of large gardeners,
         1 pair of Jupiter and Juno, 1 pair of Harlequin
         and Columbine, and 2 pair of basket boys          3  11    0

    2 A set of 3 jars, decorated with natural flowers,
        and gilt

    3 Five dozen of small boys

    4 A pair of large singers, 1 pair of sitting pipe and
        guitar figures, 1 pair of less ditto, 1 pair of
        sporting figures, and 12 boys                      3  17    0

    5 A compleat set of tea china, double shape,
        enameled with roses, festoons of green husks,
        and purple and gold border, 40 pieces              5   5    0

    6 Two Cupid groups, 1 pair of large Bacchus and
        Ariadne, 1 pair of pheasant figures, and 12 boys   5  14    0

    7 Six double shape caudle cups and stands, enameled
        with Dresden flowers, and gilt

    8 A pair of figures Shakspeare and Milton              3   3    0

    9 Two second size Dianas, 1 pair of piping shepherds,
        1 pair of large gardeners, 1 pair of sporting
        figures, and 1 pair of Mars and Venus              4  15    0

    10 Two breakfast sets, enameled fine blue and white,
         15 pieces each                                    3   5    0

    11 A figure of Andromache, 1 pair of figures Diana
         and Apollo, 1 pair of boys riding on goat and
         panther, and 2 pair of small singers              6   1    6

    12 A very elegant compleat set of tea china,
         Devonshire shape, enameled with roses, and
         richly finished with fine blue and gold, 41
         pieces                                           10   10   0

    13 A pair of figures Andromache and Plenty, 1 pair
         of haymakers, 1 pair of Mars and Minerva, and
         2 basket boys                                     4   15    0

    14 A pair of Madona groups, and 2 pair of sitting
         fruit and flower figures                          3    6    0

    15 Twelve very elegant cups and saucers, slop bason,
         cream ewer, and 4 plates                          6   13    0

    16 A large pastoral group, and 1 pair of groups
         Poetry and Music                                  5   15    6

    17 Five dozen of small boys

    18 A beautiful breakfast set, fluted, enameled fine
         blue and gold, 18 pieces                          3   18    0

    19 A pair of grotesque Punches, 1 pair of sitting
         figures, 1 set of standing seasons, and 1 pair
         of gardeners                                      3   15    0

    20 Two groups of the four seasons, 2 pair of fruit
         and flower figures                                4   18    0

    21 A compleat set of tea china, plain shape,
         enameled, fine blue and gold border, the Prince
         of Wales’s pattern, 41 pieces                     8    8    0

    22 A breakfast set handled cups, small waved flute,
         18 pieces                                         2    0    0

    23 Twelve French shape cups and saucers, ditto         2    2    0

    24 A pair of figures Diana and Apollo, and 1 set of
         small elements                                    4   10    0

    25 A set of large antique seasons, 1 pair of large
         singers, 1 pair of pipe and guitar figures,
         and 2 pair of basket boys                         4    1    0

    26 A compleat set of tea china, white and gold,
         41 pieces

    27 Six very elegant caudle cups covers and stands,
         enameled with flowers and fine blue and gold      6    0    0

    28 A group of Poetry, 1 pair of Mars and Venus
         candlesticks, 1 pair of piping shepherds, and
         1 pair of boys riding on goat and panther         4   12    0

    29 A pair of large pipe and guitar candlesticks,
         1 pair of garland shepherds, and 1 pair of
         large pipe and guitar figures                     4    0    0

    30 A figure of Falstaff, a figure of Neptune, 1
         pair of large gardeners, and 2 figures of
         Prudence                                          5    4    0

    31 A very capital compleat set of tea china,
         fluted, richly enameled with fine blue and
         gold, 41 pieces                                  14   14    0

    32 A compleat set of tea china, waved shanked,
         enameled with roses, festoon of red husks, and
         green and gold border, 41 pieces

    33 A group of Jason and Medea before Diana, and 1
         pair of groups, Poetry and Music                  5    5    0

    34 A figure of Diana, two pair of pheasant figures,
         1 pair of boys riding on goat and panther, 3
         pair of small music figures, and 4 busts          5    5    0

    35 Six half-pint basons and stands, slop bason,
         sugar box, cream ewer, and 2 plates, enameled
         fine blue and white                               2    6    0

    36 A beautiful compleat desert service, enameled
         with roses, and fine blue and gold borders,
         consisting of 24 plates, 13 comporteers, 1 pair
         of cream bowls, covers, stands, and spoons       26    5    0

    37 A figure of Justice, 1 set of small elements,
         1 pair of Cupids, and 12 boys                     4    8    0

    38 A group of Jason and Medea before Diana, 1 pair
         of pipe and guitar candlesticks, and 2 pair
         of haymakers                                      4   17    0

    39 A pair of figures Shakspeare and Milton, and a
         figure of Mr. Garrick                             4   14    6

    40 An elegant compleat set of tea china, new shape,
         white and gold, 41 pieces                         8    8    0

    41 A figure of Andromache, 1 pair of Bacchus and
         Ariadne, 1 pair of pipe and guitar figures,
         and 1 pair of fruit and flower                    4   15    0

    42 A pair of Madona groups, a pair of large
         gardeners, and 1 pair of sitting figures          4    8    0

    43 A very elegant bason and ewer, richly ornamented
         with fine blue and gold                           2   10    0

    44 A compleat set of tea china, Devonshire shape,
         enameled with roses, festoons of red husks,
         and green and gold borders, 41 pieces             5    5    0

    45 A pair of pipe and guitar candlesticks, one pair
         of Mars and Venus figures, 1 pair of pipe and
         tabor, 1 pair of sporting figures, and 1 pair
         of small pipe and guitar                          4    9    0

    46 A pair of Mars and Venus candlesticks, 2 pair of
         sacrifice figures, 6 Cupids, and 12 small boys    4    0    0

    47 A group of Poetry, and 1 pair of figures
         Andromache and Plenty                             4    7    0

    48 A beautiful dejune, enameled fine blue and gold     3   13    6

    49 A compleat set of tea china, waved shanked,
         enameled with festoons of coloured flowers,
         and green and gold border, 41 pieces              6    6    0

    50 A figure of Falstaff, 1 pair of grotesque Punches,
         1 set of Seasons, and 1 pair of Cupids riding
         on goat and panther                               4   11    0

    51 Two Cupid groups, 2 pair of large music figures,
         4 seasons, and 4 busts                            5    8    0

    52 A large figure of Britannia, 1 figure of Justice,
         and 1 figure of Falstaff                          4   19    0

    53 A very elegant breakfast set of plain shanked,
         enameled fine blue and gold, 18 pieces            4    9    0

    54 A ditto                                             4    9    0

    55 A tythe pig group, 1 set of standing seasons,
         1 pair of Mars and Minerva, 1 pair of large
         gardeners, and 12 small boys                      4    3    0

    56 A pair of Madona groups, 2 pair of sacrifice
         figures, 1 small group, and 3 pair of small
         music figures                                     5    3    0

    57 A compleat set of tea china, new embossed,
         enameled with a fine blue and gold border
         (the Queen’s pattern) 41 pieces                   6    6    0

    58 Six caudle cups, covers and stands, ditto           3   12    0

    59 A pair of large groups                              4    4    0

    60 A pair of groups, Poetry and Music, and 1 pair
         of boys riding on goat and panther                4    7    0

    61 Two figures of Diana, 1 pair of sitting pipe
         and guitar figures, and 2 pair of music figures   4   13    0

    62 A very elegant compleat set of tea china, fluted,
         richly ornamented with fine blue and gold, 41
         pieces                                           14   14    0

    63 A figure of Falstaff, 2 pair of Cupids, 1 set
         of standing seasons, and 12 small boys            3   15    0

    64 A compleat desert service, enameled fine old
         japan pattern, consisting of 24 plates, 13
         comporteers, and 1 pair of cream bowls,
         covers, stands, and spoons                       20    0    0

    65 A large pastoral group, 2 figures of Diana,
         and 1 pair of large singers                       5    5    0

    66 A pair of groups, Poetry and Music, and 1 pair
         of large pipe and guitar figures                  4    4    0

    67 A very elegant set of tea china handled cups,
         white and gold, 41 pieces                         8   18    6

    68 A group of the Virtues, and 1 ditto of the
         quarters                                          4    4    0

    69 Five dozen of small boys

    70 A compleat set of tea china, fluted, enameled
         fine blue and gold, 41 pieces

    71 A set of small elements, 2 pair of large
         gardeners, 1 pair of sporting figures, and
         3 pair of basket boys                             5    3    0

    72 Two sets of breakfast sets, small waved flute,
         enameled fine blue and white, 17 pieces each      3   19    0

    73 A compleat set of tea china, waved shanked,
         white and gold, 41 pieces

    74 A pair of spring candlesticks, 1 pair of boys
         ditto, 1 pair of haymakers, 1 pair of Mars and
         Venus figures, 1 pair of small singers, and 2
         pair of buck and doe                              4   10    0

    75 Six Devonshire shape caudle cups, covers, and
         stands, enameled fine green and gold              3   12    0

    76 Two figures of Neptune, 3 pair of large fruit
         and flower figures, 6 squarrels, and 12 boys      5   16    0

    77 A set of 3 vauses, enameled with flowers, and
         green and gold

    78 A pair of figures Andromache and Plenty, and
         1 pair of large pipe and guitar candlesticks      4   12    0

    79 A very elegant compleat set of tea china,
         peacock pattern, enameled fine blue and gold,
         41 pieces                                        11   11    0

    80 A tythe pig group, 1 pair of Jupiter and Juno,
         2 pair of Harlequin and Columbine, 1 set of
         standing seasons, and 12 small boys               4   11    0

    81 A pair of groups, Poetry and Music, and 1 pair
         of boys riding on goat and panther                4    7    0

    82 A breakfast set of bell-shape cups with handles,
         enameled fine blue and gold, 18 pieces            3   13    0

    83 A ditto                                             3   13    0

    84 A set of elements, 1 pair of singers, and 1 pair
         of Mars and Venus figures                         5    8    0

    85 A pair of figures Shakspeare and Milton             3    3    0

    86 A compleat set of tea china, white and gold, 41
         pieces

    87 A group of 2 Baccants, 1 figure of Andromache,
         and 1 figure of Neptune                           4   14    0

    88 A figure of Diana, 2 pair of sitting pipe and
         guitar figures, 1 set of grotesque seasons, 1
         pair of Jupiter and Juno, and 12 boys             4    8    0

    89 A pair of Madona groups, 1 set of quarters, and
         2 pair of basket boys                             4    4    0

    90 A pair of figures Andromache and Plenty, and a
         pair of pipe and guitar chandeliers               4   18    0

    91 A figure of Falstaff, 1 set of small elements,
         2 Cupids and 2 pair of sporting figures           4   14    0

    92 Five dozen of small boys

    93 A group of 3 virgins distressing Cupid, and 2
         Cupid groups                                      5   16    0

    94 A figure of Diana, 1 pair of haymakers, 2 pair
         of small gardeners, 5 desert gardeners, 4
         busts, and 12 boys                                3    4    0

    95 A tythe pig group, 1 pair of sitting pipe and
         guitar figures, 1 pair of Harlequins, and 3
         pair of basket boys                               3    2    0

    96 A group of Poetry, 2 pair of small elements,
         and 1 pair of sitting pipe and guitar figures     4   11    0

    97 A figure of Justice, 1 pair of piping shepherds,
         1 set of standing seasons, and 1 pair of
         grotesque figures                                 4   12    0

    98 A pair of large groups                              4    4    0

    99 A pair of Madona groups, 2 pair of sitting
         fruit and flower figures, and 3 pair of
         small music figures                               4    7    0

    100 A pair of figures Diana and Apollo, 2 pair
          of large gardeners, and 1 pair of sitting
          figures                                          4   14    0

    101 A set of large French seasons

    102 A pair of pipe and guitar candlesticks, 1 pair
          of spring ditto, and a set of standing seasons   3    3    0

    103 Æsculapius and Hygiæa, 1 pair of sacrifice
          figures, 4 pair of small Turks, 2 pair of
          salutation figures, 2 basket boys, 13 birds,
          2 dogs, and 4 boys

    104 A group of Poetry, 2 pair of sporting figures,
          and 1 pair of boys riding on goat and panther    4    2    0

    105 A pair of large ice-pails, white and gold          5    5    0

    106 A group of Jason and Medea, 1 pair of large
          singers, 1 pair of Mars and Minerva, and 2
          pair of basket boys                              5    1    0

    107 A compleat set of tea china, white and gold,
          41 pieces

    108 A group of Poetry, 8 antique seasons, 1 pair
          of sitting figures, 1 pair of music figures,
          and 12 boys                                      4   14    0

    109 Four elegant broth basons, covers, and stands,
          enameled fine blue and gold pearl border         3    0    0

    110 A pair of Madona groups, 1 pair of Jupiter and
          Juno, and a set of sitting seasons               4    1    0

    111 Twenty-two sundry small figures

    112 A beautiful bason and ewer, and 2 punch jugs,
          with covers, enameled fine blue and gold         3   18    0

    113 A large pastoral group, 4 antique seasons, and
          a pair of large gardeners

    114 A pair of groups Poetry and Music, and a pair
          of boys riding on goat and panther               4    7    0

    115 A breakfast set, small flute, enameled with a
          fine blue and gold pearl border, 18 Pieces       4    3    0

    116 A compleat set of tea china, new embossed,
          enameled with a fine blue and gold border,
          41 pieces                                        6    6    0

    117 A pair of figures Andromache and Plenty, a
          pair of Cupids, and 2 pair of sitting pipe
          and guitar                                       4   13    0

    118 Five dozen of small boys

    119 A compleat desert service, enameled, fine old
          Japan pattern, consisting of 24 plates, 13
          comporteers, and 1 pair of cream bowls,
          covers, stands, and spoons                      26    5    0

    120 A figure of Falstaff, 2 pair of Bacchus and
          Ariadne, and 1 pair of boys riding on goat
          and panther                                      5   18    0

    121 Twelve new shape cups and saucers, 1 slop
          bason, sugar-box, cream ewer, and plate,
          enameled with fine blue springs, and narrow
          blue border                                      2    0    0

    122 A very elegant compleat set of tea china
          handled cups, richly enameled with fine
          blue and gold scrole border, 41 pieces          12   12    0

    123 A group of the virtues, 1 pair of large
          Bacchus and Ariadne, 1 pair of haymakers, and
          1 pair of sitting figures                        5    3    0

    124 A tythe pig group, a set of standing seasons,
          a pair of Cupids, a pair of gardeners, and 3
          pair of basket boys                              4    2    0

    125 Twelve chocolate cups and saucers, enameled
          with festoons of green husks, and pink and
          gold border                                      3   18    0

    126 A beautiful dejune, enameled, with vauses, &c.
          and fine blue and gold                           4    4    0

    127 A pair of figures Shakspeare and Milton, and a
          pair of sitting pipe and guitar figures          4    4    0

    128 A figure of Falstaff, and a set of elements        4    5    0

    129 Two breakfast sets, enameled fine blue and white   4    6    0

    130 A pair of pipe and guitar candlesticks, and a
          pair of spring ditto                             2    3    0

    131 Six elegant caudle cups, covers, and stands,
          enameled fine blue and gold

    132 Two breakfast sets, enameled fine blue and
          white, 18 pieces each                            4    6    0

    133 Two Cupid groups, a pair of singers, and a pair
          of boys riding on goat and panther               4   11    0

    134 A figure of Falstaff, 4 small elements, and 2
          pair of Jupiter and Juno                         4   13    0

    135 A beautiful compleat set of tea china, enameled
          with festoons of gold husks, and fine blue
          and gold border (Prince of Wales’s pattern)     10   10    0

    136 A pair of large groups                             5   15    0

    137 A pair of figures Shakspeare and Milton            3    2    0

    138 Six elegant caudle cups, covers, and stands,
          enameled fine blue and gold

    139 A breakfast set, enameled with blue and gold
          springs, and blue and gold border, 18 pieces     3   13    0

    140 A pair of large pipe and guitar candlesticks,
          and a set of small French seasons                3   18    0

    141 A tythe pig group, 1 pair of large gardeners,
          2 pair of sitting pipe and guitar figures,
          and 3 pair of basket boys                        3   14    0

    142 A compleat set of tea china, white and gold

    143 A season group, 1 pair of Bacchus and Ariadne,
          and 3 odd figures

    144 A pair of large Bacchus and Ariadne, 1 pair
          of boys riding on goat and panther, 1 pair
          of large fruit and flower figures, 3 pair
          of small ditto, and 1 pair of basket boys        4   16    0

    145 A compleat set of tea china, peacock pattern,
          enameled green and gold, 41 pieces               8    8    0

    146 Four caudle cups, covers, and stands, enameled
          with roses, festoons, and purple and gold
          border                                           2    8    0

    147 Two large pastoral groups                          4    4    0

    148 A pair of figures Andromache and Plenty, and
          1 pair of grotesque Punches                      3   17    0

    149 Five dozen of small boys

    150 A elegant compleat set of tea china, white
          and gold, 41 pieces

    151 A group of Jason and Medea before Diana,
          1 pair of large singers, 1 pair of large
          gardeners, and 1 pair of sporting figures        4   13    0

    152 A large pastoral group, and 1 pair of pipe
          and guitar candlesticks                          3   17    6

    153 A beautiful compleat desert service, enameled
          with roses and fine blue and gold borders,
          consisting of 24 plates, 13 comporteers,
          and 1 pair of cream bowls, covers, stands,
          and spoons                                      26    5    0

    154 A figure of Andromache, a pair of antique
          seasons, a pair of Bacchus and Ariadne, a
          pair of sacrifice figures, and a pair of
          fruit and flower                                 4   13    0

    155 A compleat set of tea china, white and gold,
          41 pieces

    156 Five dozen of small boys

    157 A large group of three virgins, a pair of
          large seasons, and 2 pair of music figures

    158 Six chocolate cups and saucers, enameled with
          fine blue and gold borders, and 6 ditto,
          enameled with Dresden flowers and gold edge      3    6    0

    159 Four basons, covers, and stands, enameled with
          red husks, and fine blue and gold border         3    3    0

    160 A group of Baccants, and 2 pair of large elements  5   14    0

    161 A pair of figures Andromache and Plenty, and
          2 pair of sporting figures                       4    4    0

    162 A compleat desert service, enameled fine old
          blue and gold Japan pattern, consisting of
          24 plates, 13 comporteers, and a pair of
          cream bowls, covers, stands, and spoons         18   18    0

    163 A pair of Mars and Venus candlesticks, 2 pair
          of haymakers, and 1 set of quarters              4    6    0

    164 A very elegant compleat set of tea china,
          enameled with roses, and fine blue and
          gold border, 41 pieces                           8    8    0

    165 Twelve breakfast basons and stands, slop bason,
          sugar box, and 12 bread and butter plates,
          white and gold                                   4   10    0

    166 A tythe pig group, 2 pair of small singers, 2
          pair of sporting figures, and 3 pair of
          basket boys                                      3   16    0

    167 A group of three virgins, a pair of large
          seasons, and a pair of Bacchus and Ariadne       5   15    6

    168 A compleate set of tea china, enameled fine
          blue and gold, 41 pieces

    169 A group of the quarters, 1 pair of large
          elements, and 6 antique seasons                  4   18    0

    170 A pair of Madona groups, and 2 pair of Mars
          and Minerva                                      3   18    0

    171 A compleat set of tea china, white and gold
          dontel edge, 41 pieces                           4    4    0

    172 A Cupid group, a pair of season groups, and 2
          pair of small Bacchus and Ariadne                5    0    0

    173 Five dozen of small boys

    174 A very elegant compleat set of tea china,
          fluted, richly enameled with fine blue
          and gold, 41 pieces                             14   14    0

    175 A pair of pipe and guitar chandeliers, 1 pair
          of garland shepherds, and 1 pair of French
          shepherds                                        4    2    0

    176 A pair of Welch taylors, 2 pair of sporting
          figures, 2 pair of small gardeners, and 1
          set of sitting seasons                           4    8    0

    177 A compleat desert service, enameled with groups
          of flowers, and fine blue and gold vini
          border, consisting of 24 plates, 13
          comporteers, and 1 pair of cream-bowls and
          stands                                          25    0    0

    178 A pair of figures Andromache and Plenty, 1
          pair of fruit flower figures, and 1 pair
          of sacrifice figures                             4    2    0

    179 A figure of Diana, 1 pair of sitting pipe
          and guitar figures, 2 pair of Harlequin
          and Columbine, and 2 pair of basket boys         3   19    0

    180 An elegant compleat set of tea china, 41 pieces

    181 A group of the 4 seasons, 1 set of French
          seasons, 2 antique seasons, and 6 small
          Turks

    182 A Cupid group, 1 pair of Bacchus and Ariadne,
          6 antique seasons, and 12 boys

    183 A set of 5 large vauses, enameled compartments,
          with figures, and richly gilt

    184 A group of poetry, and 1 pair of large figures     3    6    0

    185 A pair of groups Poetry and Music, and 4 odd
          figures

    186 Five dozen of small boys

    187 A tythe pig group, 1 set of standing seasons,
          1 pair of sitting figures, and 2 pair of
          small gardeners                                  3   11    0

    188 A pair of boy candlesticks, 2 pair of large
          gardeners, 1 pair of sitting pipe and
          guitar figures, and 2 pair of small fruit
          and flower                                       3   18    0

    189 Sundries

    190 Ditto

    191 Ditto

    192 Ditto

    193 Ditto

    194 Ditto

    195 Ditto

    196 Ditto

    197 Ditto

    198 Ditto

  [Illustration: Figs. 47 to 50.--From the Museum of Practical
  Geology.]

A few months before Mr. Duesbury’s death--which, as I have stated, took
place in November, 1786--he took his son William into partnership,
and the business was carried on under the style of “Messrs. William
Duesbury and Son.” It thus appears upon the title-pages of the sale
catalogue of 22nd September in that year, but is altered back to “Mr.
William Duesbury” alone in that for 21st December following. For some
years before the death of his father the younger Mr. William Duesbury
had devoted himself untiringly to the advancement of the works. No
man could have been more highly respected, both by his workmen and by
all who knew or had dealings with him at home and abroad, than was
this second William Duesbury, and under his care the works continued
to grow in importance with an astonishing rapidity, and soon became
by far the most prosperous and most successful in the kingdom. The
connection which had previously been formed with the principal
families, from royalty downwards, spread and increased, and among the
hundreds of names of purchasers on the sale sheets and other papers,
I come across, at random, those of the King, the Queen, the Prince of
Wales (afterwards George IV.), who was a large customer for dessert,
tea, coffee, and other services; the Duchess of Devonshire, William
Pitt, Sir Hugh Pallisser, the Margravine of Anspach, the Duke of
Northumberland, Lord Howe, and indeed almost every title then in the
peerage. Besides this, several ladies of distinction painted groups
of flowers and other pictures on porcelain, supplied to them for the
purpose by Mr. Duesbury, who afterwards fired and finished them for
their own special use. Of these ladies, Lady Margaret Fordyce, Lady
Plymouth, and Lady Aubrey executed some beautiful drawings, which
probably may still remain in their families. Lord Lonsdale also had
twenty-four plates painted with landscapes in Cumberland, from his
own sketches, and many other noblemen and gentlemen did the same;
many sets of china being painted with views of different parts of the
estates of those for whom they were manufactured. Bronze figures of
horses--probably originally belonging to the famous Duke of Newcastle,
whose work on Horsemanship is the finest ever produced--were lent to
Mr. Duesbury from Welbeck Abbey; and Lady Spencer also sent some choice
moulds for working from. Altogether the Derby works, during the latter
part of the first Mr. Duesbury’s time, and during the life of his son,
were, as I have said, the most successful, the best conducted, and the
most fashionable establishment of the kind in the kingdom.

  [Illustration: Fig. 51.--“King’s vase,” Museum of Practical
  Geology.]

Constant application to business, and the wear and tear of the brain
from incessant anxieties, about 1795 made such fearful inroads on the
health of Mr. Duesbury, that he was induced by his friends to take into
partnership a Mr. Michael Kean, a very clever miniature painter, an
Irishman by birth, who brought his talents to bear on the works, and
by his skill in designing and drawing added much to the beauty of the
articles manufactured. His connection however, seems to have been a
source of still greater anxiety to Mr. Duesbury, whose mind gradually
gave way under his load of care. In 1796 Mr. Duesbury died, and after
a time Mr. Kean (who had for a time the management of the business for
the widow and her young family) married the widow, but not long after,
from reasons into which it is needless to enter, as they do not affect
the narrative, withdrew hastily from the concern, and the works were
then continued for, and afterwards by, the third William Duesbury. Mrs.
Duesbury, by her second marriage (with Michael Kean) had a family of
five children. She died in 1829, after having passed a not altogether
happy life. This third William Duesbury (grandson of the founder of the
works) was the eldest son of William Duesbury by his wife, Elizabeth
Edwards. He was born in 1787, and on the 26th September, 1808, married
Annabella, daughter of William E. Sheffield, Esq., of the Polygon,
Somers Town, London, and for a time the concern was carried on under
the firm of “Duesbury and Sheffield.”

In 1815, Mr. Duesbury leased the premises to Mr. Robert Bloor, who had
been a clerk to his father, and had carried on the business during Mr.
Duesbury’s minority, and the entire concern ultimately passed into his
hands, and was carried on by him for the first few years with much
judgment and skill.

  [Illustration: Fig. 52.]

Before Mr. Bloor’s time it had been the constant plan of the
Duesburys--so worthily tenacious were they of their reputation, and of
keeping up the high and unblemished character of their works--to allow
none but _perfect_ goods to leave their premises, and no matter
how costly the article, or how trivial the fault (frequently so trivial
as to be only perceptible to the most practised eye), all goods which
were not perfect were stowed away in rooms in the factory, and had
accumulated to an enormous extent. When Mr. Bloor took the concern,
this stock of seconds goods became an almost exhaustless mine of wealth
to him. Having to pay the purchase money by instalments, he found the
easiest method of doing so was to finish up these goods, take them to
different large towns, and there sell them by auction, and also to
have sales at the manufactory; one of these sales, in 1822, continued
twenty-five days. By this means Mr. Bloor amassed large sums of money,
as the “Derby china” found ready and liberal purchasers wherever it
was thus offered. This system, however, though it had a temporary
good, produced a lasting evil. The temptation to produce large
quantities of goods specially for auction sale was so great as not to
be withstood, and as by this means they were disposed of “with all
their imperfections thick upon them,” less care was devoted to their
manufacture, and the decline of the works, principally from this cause,
commenced.

Mr. Robert Bloor was assisted in his works by his brother Joseph, by
whom the “mixing” was mainly done, and from 1828, when Mr. Robert
Bloor’s health began to fail, they were carried on for him by a manager
named Thomason. The two brothers died within a short time of each
other. Robert, who had lost his mind for many years before his decease,
died in 1845, and Joseph the year following. The works then passed
into the hands of Mr. Thomas Clarke, who had married a grand-daughter
of Robert Bloor’s, who discontinued them, and sold most of the models,
&c., to the Staffordshire manufacturers--the greater bulk going into
the hands of Mr. Boyle, a manufacturer, of Fenton, who was son of Mr.
John Boyle, and for a short time before his death a partner with the
Wedgwoods. The final dissolution of the old works took place in 1848,
when a number of the workmen naturally migrated into Staffordshire and
Worcestershire.

At this time, however, several of the old hands--actuated by the
laudable desire of securing the continuance of a business which for
a century had been so successfully carried on, and of continuing it
as one of the trades of their native town--clubbed together (to use
a characteristic expression), and commenced business on their own
account. They each and all threw into the common stock what knowledge,
experience, money, and tools, &c, they possessed, took premises in King
Street (on the site of old St. Helen’s Nunnery), and under the name
of “Locker and Co.” commenced making “Derby china,” and adopted, very
properly, a distinctive mark, which shows this epoch in the works. It
is a somewhat curious circumstance, that on the site of the old china
works the modern Roman Catholic nunnery of S. Marie was erected; while
on the site of the old nunnery of St. Helen, the present china works
are now carried on. Great difficulties were encountered by this band of
workmen, but their zeal and determination overcame them.

Mr. Locker (who was a native of Blackfordby, and had been clerk and
warehouseman at the old works in the latter part of their existence)
died in 1859, and the works were next conducted under the style of
“Stevenson and Co.,” and “Stevenson, Sharp, and Co.,” till the death of
Mr. Stevenson, when the style was changed to that of “Hancock and Co.,”
and the works are now continued by Mr. Sampson Hancock, and bid fair,
if not to rival the early glory and success of the works, at least to
do credit to the town of Derby, in which they are situated. Some of the
productions are highly creditable to the taste and skill of the men,
and show that “ye art of making English china,” imparted to William
Duesbury in 1756, is not forgotten, but remains with his successors to
the present day.

One of the last large services made by Bloor was a magnificent dessert
made for her present Majesty, and some large additions to that set, and
pieces for replacing, have been from time to time made by the present
owners of the works, which are still therefore as fully entitled to
the name of “Royal” works as any of their predecessors. The marks used
by these later firms will be found engraved on page 93; I give them to
complete the chronological series. The name of Courtney, which appears
on one of these marks, was Bloor’s agent.

Having now gone through the HISTORY of the works, it only remains to
speak of the artists employed, and of one branch of the manufacture,
that of “Biscuit,” which requires more than a passing notice. This
material was a discovery of, and quite peculiar to, the Derby Works,
and the secret of its composition is still preserved. To it the
beautiful material Parian thus owes its origin. One of the Derby
workmen having engaged himself to Mr. Copeland, was trying experiments
to recover the secret of the biscuit composition, when instead of
it he produced accidentally that which has been named “Parian,”
and in which all the exquisitely beautiful figures and groups that
characterise their, and other equally admirable, productions have
since, with modifications and improvements, been worked. It is pleasant
thus to know, that although the art of making Derby biscuit figures
has been discontinued, the Parian has sprung from it, and was first
produced by a Derby man. Nothing could exceed the sharpness and beauty
of the biscuit figures as produced in the best days of the Derby
Works, and some examples, for delicacy and fineness of modelling, and
for sharpness of touch, have never, in any ceramic material, been
surpassed, or scarcely equalled.

Transfer printing on china appears to have been introduced at Derby in
1764--some years before even Wedgwood printed his own ware, but while
he was in the habit of sending it off to Liverpool to be printed by
Messrs. Sadler and Green. The process, however, did not obtain much
favour at Derby, and Mr. Duesbury evidently found it better, and more
satisfactory, to adhere to hand-work in all his goods. The person who
introduced the process, and whom he engaged to carry it on, was Richard
Holdship, of Worcester, who, by deed, covenanted for the sum of £100
paid down, and a yearly sum of £30 so long as the works continued on
his process, to impart in writing to Messrs. Duesbury and Heath his
secret process for making china according to proofs already made by him
at the Derby Works; to supply them with all sufficient quantities of
soapy rock at fair prices; and to print all the china or porcelain ware
which might have occasion to be printed. The engagement with Holdship
lasted, at all events, many years, but during that time the printing
evidently was not much followed, as in his letters to his employers
he is constantly complaining of having no work for his presses, and
in having no goods made according to his process. He had an assistant
named William Underwood, and in one of his letters he values his press
at ten guineas in cash, and his copper-plates at a large amount, while
he says “for his process for Printing Enamell and Blew, he hath been
offered several Hundred Pounds.” His stock of enamel colours, 151 lbs.
in weight, he offers to sell for £35. It is needless to write more
in this place of Holdship’s connection with Derby, as I have already
given more full particulars in the first volume, page 232. At one time
John Lodge, the eminent engraver, engraved some plates for printing at
Derby. The following is his bill for some engraving done in 1771:--

    Mr. DEUSBERRY Dr. to JOHN LODGE,

                                                   £ _s._ _d._
    Engraving a Plate of Chinese Figures           0  10   6
    Copper to do.                                  0   2   6
    To Engraving Eight Borders                     0  16   0
    Copper to do.                                  0   1  11
    To Engraving two Plates for Cups and Saucer    1   1   0
    Copper                                         0   4   5
    To Engraving two Plates for Cup and Saucer     1   1   0
    Copper to do.                                  0   2   4
    To Engraving two Plates for Small China        1   4   0
    Copper to do.                                  0   5  10
                                                  ----------
                                                  £5   9   6
                                                  ==========

    Sept. 28, 1771.
        Recd. the Contents in full of all demands, JOHN LODGE.

Fruit dishes, and other articles were at one time made with open-work
reticulated rims or sides; a raised “Dresden” flower being placed
on each of the outer sections in much the same manner as was
characteristic of one period of Worcester work. These were made both in
blue and white, and in enamel; they are somewhat scarce.

  [Illustration: Fig. 53.]

In 1789 Mr. Duesbury endeavoured to introduce batt-printing into his
manufactory, and for that purpose prevailed on his former assistant, J.
Hancock, then in Staffordshire, to inquire into and describe to him the
process. I must not omit to say that earthen ware, called the “Cream
Ware,” very closely resembling Wedgwood’s celebrated “Queen’s Ware,”
was made at Derby for a short time, and was of great beauty. Specimens
of this ware are of great rarity.

In 1790 Mr. Duesbury invented a machine for exhibiting the contraction
of earthen bodies when in the fire; this he had constructed by Spooner
and Son.

  [Illustration: Figs. 56 to 58.]

The marks used at the Derby China Works may be thus briefly summarised.
The simple writing letter _D_ is said to have been the first mark used
by William Duesbury. The _D_, which stands either as the initial of
Derby or of Duesbury, conjoined with the anchor of Chelsea [anchor
symbol] is the distinctive mark of the Chelsea-Derby period--the period
when William Duesbury, who had purchased the Chelsea works, carried on
both the manufactories, and, later, produced goods at Derby from the
Chelsea moulds. Two or three varieties of this mark, according to the
taste or whim of the workmen, occur (see Figs. 56, 57, and 58).

  [Illustration: Figs. 59 to 61.]

Two other marks, the one a _D_ surmounted by a crown, and the other
an anchor, similarly surmounted, are said to have denoted respectively
the articles made at this period at Derby and at Chelsea (Figs. 59 to
63). Now and then the first of these is met with in connection with the
anchor (Fig. 63).

  [Illustration: Figs. 62 to 67.]

The most usual mark is that of the letter D, with crossed swords, dots,
and crown, of which several varieties occur. Sometimes the initial is
the writing letter _D_, and sometimes a Roman capital D, and the
crown also varies according to the caprice of the painter. Figs. 64 to
67 show some of the varieties.

  [Illustration: Fig. 68.]

A variety of this, in which a _D_ and a _K_ are conjoined, denotes the
period when the works, in their later days, were carried on by Duesbury
and Kean. It was, however, only very sparsely used. For some years, at
all events up to about 1825 or 1830, Mr. Bloor continued to use the
old mark of the Duesburys--the crown, cross daggers with dots, and D
beneath--but about that period discontinued it, and adopted instead a
mark with his own name (Fig. 68). It is well to note, that down to the
discontinuance of the old mark, it had invariably been done with the
pencil, _by hand_, but that those adopted by Mr. Bloor were _printed_
ones. The first printed mark I believe to be Fig. 69, and somewhat
later the same was used, but slightly larger in size (Fig. 71). Other
marks are shown on the engravings. Figs. 74 and 75 have an old English
[Illustration: D] surmounted by a crown; another (Fig. 76) a crown,
with a riband bearing the word DERBY in Roman capitals beneath it.

  [Illustration: Figs. 69 to 73.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 74 to 78.]

Other marks, said to have been for one purpose or other--of course as
imitations--used at Derby, are the following:--

  [Illustration: Figs. 79 to 84.]

In my own possession is a design, in pencil, by Mr. Duesbury, by his
own hand, for a mark, which I engrave on Fig. 84, although I believe
it was never adopted. At all events I have failed in discovering a
single specimen so marked. Mrs. Palliser, however, engraves a mark as
occurring on a cup and saucer, which somewhat assimilates to it. She
also gives, from a specimen in her own possession, the word _Derby_
in writing letters. This, she states, occurs “in black on a biscuit
statuette;” but I fear the mark has been added at a later date. Another
mark, which has been described to me, but of which I have not seen an
example, is very similar to Fig. 84, but has the cross daggers and
crown added, with the encircling words “DUESBURY, DERBY,” Fig. 85. It
may be well, _en passant_, to notice a mark which appears on one of
the copper-plates of the Caughley works (see Vol. I., p. 273). It is
an anchor over the word “Derby.” As the initials RH conjoined also
appear along with the anchor and word “Worcester,” and may mean either
R. Hancock or Richard Holdship, the probability is they belong to the
latter (who was connected with the Derby works), and that the _anchor_
was adopted in allusion to his name, _hold ship_--a very clever and
ingenious device. Another variety belonging to Mr. Robinson differs
slightly from these.

  [Illustration: Figs. 84 to 89.]

On some services, notably on the royal service, mentioned on page 88,
Mr. Bloor had his name painted in full--

  [Illustration:

    _Messrs. Robert Bloor & Co.,_
    _34, Old Bond Street_,]

on the back of plates, &c. The “Co.” in this instance was Mr. Thomas
Courteney, the London agent, through whom the order was procured.
His place of business was 34, Old Bond Street, and many of the goods
afterwards made for him bore the accompanying mark, Fig. 91. Messrs.
Locker & Co., at the modern King Street works, used the mark, Fig. 92,
and their successors, Stevenson, Sharp, and Co., the next one. The next
firm, Stevenson and Hancock, used, in accordance with my suggestion,
and a sketch I made for them, in 1862, the old Derby mark of the crown,
crossed daggers, dots, and letter [Illustration: _D_], with the
initials of the firm S. H. (for Stevenson and Hancock); this is still
continued by the present sole proprietor, Sampson Hancock--the letters
S. H. being, fortunately, his own initials.

  [Illustration: Figs. 91 to 94.]

Of the artists employed at the Derby China Works, the principal
modellers appear to have been Spengler, Stephan, Coffee, Complin,
Hartenberg, Duvivier, Webber, and Dear, and many others, including
Bacon the sculptor, were employed in London, and the models sent down
to the works.

Of the painters, the principal ones were Bowman, who was originally of
Chelsea, afterwards of Derby, and then again of London, and who was
one of the best flower and landscape painters of his day; Billingsley,
who received instruction from Bowman, and whose flower pieces have
certainly never been surpassed, or even equalled; Hill, a famous
painter of landscapes, who delighted in sylvan scenery; Brewer, also
an excellent landscape and figure painter, and whose wife, Bernice
Brewer, was also a painter; Pegg, who surpassed in faithful copying
of nature, in single branches and flowers, and in autumnal borders;
Samuel Keys, a clever ornamentalist, who ended his days in the employ
of Mintons; Steel, who excelled all others in painting fruit; John
Keys, a flower painter; Cotton and Askew, two highly-gifted painters of
figures; Webster, Withers, Hancock (two, uncle and nephew), Bancroft
and others as flower painters; Lowton, clever at hunting and sporting
subjects; and Robertson, at landscapes.[17] But besides these, there
were many other really clever artists employed. It is pleasant, too,
to know, that “Wright, of Derby,” the celebrated portrait painter, the
contemporary and fellow pupil with Reynolds, lent his powerful aid on
some occasions,[18] in supplying drawings and giving advice, as did
also De Boeuff, Bartolozzi, Sanby, Glover, and many others of eminence;
and it is also interesting to add, that one of the Wedgwood family,
Jonathan Wedgwood, was at one time employed at Derby. The draft of
agreement between himself and William Duesbury, dated 1772, is in my
own possession, and by it he binds himself for three years to work at
“the arts of repairing or throwing china or porcelaine ware,” for the
sum of fourteen shillings per week. A few brief notes upon some of the
artists of the Derby works will doubtless be of service to collectors;
I therefore dot down the following memoranda:--

   J. J. SPENGLER, a Frenchman, had been occasionally employed in
   London by Mr. Duesbury to model figures for him, and in 1790, on
   the recommendation of Mr. Vulliamy, entered into an agreement
   to come to Derby. Mr. Wallis, in his not very reliable account
   of the Derby China Works, to which I have before referred, says
   Spengler “was brought to Derby from London by Mr. Kean,” but
   this is an error. He was in Derby years before Mr. Kean had any
   connection with the works. The original agreements, dated July
   13 and September 15th, 1790, are in my own possession (as are
   also a number of original letters, accounts, and other documents
   connected with him), and is as follows:--

                               “A COPY.

    “A Memorandum.                            London, July 13, 1790.

   “That the Bearer, Mr. J. Spengler, has agreed to come down
   to the Manufactory at Derby, to work as Modeller, &c, and to
   receive for the first month after the rate of three Guineas per
   week, and his expenses paid down by the Coach. His hours of work
   is to be from Seven o’clock in the morning till the rest of the
   People in the Manufactory give Over work in the Evening. It is
   further agreed on, that after the expiration of the first Month,
   if the parties like each other and they agree for a fixed time
   to come, The bearer, Mr. J. Spengler, is then only to receive
   after the rate of two pounds ten shillings per week from the
   first day he began to work in the manufactory.

    “Witness:             (Signed)              “For Mr. W. Duesbury.
        “B. Vulliamy.         “J. Spengler.         “J. Lygo.”

   He accordingly came to Derby and a more full agreement was drawn
   up in September. On the 15th of that month he drew up and signed
   a memorandum to the effect that as he knew nothing either
   of the laws or language of England, he was to go to London
   to cause to be examined the agreement made between himself
   and “Monsieur Duesbury Maitre de la fabrique de Porcelaine a
   Derbey,” and should it be found right, to return at once to
   Derby and sign and execute it; Mr. Duesbury agreeing to pay the
   expenses of the journey and half the loss of time at the rate
   fixed in the agreement. This memorandum, which is well written,
   but in wretched French, is signed by “J. Spengler” and by “Mr.
   Duesbury” thus:--

      “Sep. 15th, ’90. As far as I can understand the French Language,
    I conceive the above to be right.

                                                      W^m Duesbury.”

   Spengler first went down to Derby in the beginning of August,
   1790, soon after the date of the agreement of July 13th (having
   just previously modelled a “Figure of Astronomy, in London,”
   for which Mr. Duesbury paid him ten guineas, and for extra time
   expended over it at Derby, in finishing, an additional two and
   a half guineas), and his first pieces of work were “Figure
   with a Vase (Morning),” and its companion, a “Figure with a
   Vase (Noon),” for each of which he was paid seven guineas; and
   the “Three Graces,” for the time expended on which he was paid
   six guineas.[19] Before long, unpleasantness arose through
   Spengler’s inattention to work, breach of contracts, and
   getting into debt, and in 1792 he left Derby surreptitiously.
   Proceedings were taken by Mr. Duesbury; his goods (the inventory
   of which, dated March 18th, is before me) were sold; and he was
   captured at Ramsgate, and placed in the King’s Bench Prison.
   The result of law proceedings was that Spengler entered into a
   fresh agreement with Mr. Duesbury (I have the draft) by which
   he covenanted “Not to lose more time in any one week than half
   a day, sickness excepted, under the penalty of paying after
   the rate of 7s. per day to Mr. D., Mr. S. to continue to serve
   Mr. D. to the best of his skill (without working for any other
   person) until he shall have paid Mr. D. the ballance due to him,
   and all lawful expences; Mr. D. receiving two-thirds of his
   earnings, Spengler to have liberty to attend any number of hours
   (that the manufactory is open for others) over and above those
   work’d by himself and the rest of the other hands for overtime,
   and to receive in the same proportion for such time as for the
   regular day’s time,” and so on. He was, evidently, for the
   purpose of carrying out the agreement, bailed out of the King’s
   Bench by a friend, whose letters I possess, but by November of
   the same year had again left his employment.[20]

   Spengler was then again in the King’s Bench, from which, on
   the 31st of January, after other correspondence, he wrote a
   very pathetic letter (in French, as all his letters are) to Mr.
   Duesbury, and ultimately it appears that an arrangement was come
   to for him to work in London. In 1794, fresh arrangements were
   again in progress (Spengler, who was living at Chelsea, in the
   meantime having continued to work for Mr. Duesbury), and much
   correspondence took place; the result being that in February,
   1795, Spengler returned to Derby, under a fresh agreement,
   which, as it contains much valuable information as to figures
   and groups, and prices for modelling them, I give entire:--

   “_Heads of an Agreement to be enterd into between Wm. Duesbury
   of Derby in the County of Derby & J. J. Spengler, Modeller,
   Viz._:--

   “J. J. S. to serve W^m. D. his Ex^s. Adm^s. or Ass^s. in his
   Manufactory at Derby for so long as W. D. his Ex^s. Adm^s. or
   Ass^s. shall have occasion for the assistance of J. J. S. W. D.
   his Ex^s. Adm^s. & Ass^s. reserving to themselves the power of
   Terminating this Agreement by giving J. J. S. 1 Month’s notice
   at any time. J. J. S. to have the like power of Terminating it
   at any time by giving 1 M^s. notice unless he shall not be able
   in that time to complete any Set of work he may have undertaken
   in which case J. J. S. to stop with W. D. his Ex^s. Adm^s. or
   Ass^s. till such work is so finishd if required by W. D. his
   Ex^s. Adm^s. or Ass^s.

   “W. D. having been a great looser by J. J. S. under a former
   Agreement, it is now agreed that W. D. his Ex^s. Adm^s. or
   Ass^s. shall have the liberty to pay J. J. S. for his Work
   either by the day at four shillings p^r day of 10 hours (to be
   the same hours which other Workmen work for a day from time to
   time in the Porc^n. Manufactory at Derby) or by the piece as
   aftermentiond at their option when any piece of Work shall be
   finished.

   “The prizes for each Male or Female Human Figure to be Modeld
   by J. J. S. from any sketch either on paper or in Clay &c. as
   highly finished as the Russian Shepherd Group--Palemon & Lavinia
   Group--Blind Beggar & Daughter D^o. modeld for W. D. by J. J. S.
   some time since to be

                                                 £ _s._ _d._
    If  4 Inches high & not exceding  5 In.          6   6
    „   5       „          „          6 „            8   0
    „   6       „          „          7 „           11   6
    „   7       „          „          8 „           13   6
    „   8       „          „          9 „           16   0
    „   9       „          „         10 „           18   6
    „  10       „          „         11 „        1   1   0
    „  11       „          „         12 „        1   4   0
    „  12       „          „         13 „        1   8   0
    „  13       „          „         14 „        1  13   0
    „  14       „        }
    „  15       „        }
    „  16       „        } and so on in proportion.
    „  17       „        }
    „  18       „        }
    Intermediate Sizes in proportion.

   “J. J. S. to go to Derby at his own expence & to begin work in
   28 Days after his signing this Engagement. In the mean time
   Mr. Lygo to pay him from the Time he signs this Agreem^t. 5/-
   p^r. Week to be repaid by J. J. S. by Weekly Stoppages of Eight
   Shillings.

   “J. J. S. in all other particulars to work at & be subject to
   the same rules, orders, & regulations as the rest of the Workmen
   of the Manufactory at Derby.

   “All Sketches to be made whether in Clay or on paper, &c., under
   the direction of Mr. D. his Ex^s.] Adm^s. or Ass^s]. by the day
   without limitation of time. J. J. S. to do the best he can in
   this particular to dispatch business.

   “J. J. S. & W. D. agree hereby to execute regular articles of
   agreements conformable to the above specified heads so soon as
   the same can conveniently be prepared, under the Penelty of One
   Hundred Pounds. Signd this 10^{th} day of Jan^y 1795.

                                                “SPENGLER
    “Witness--JOSEPH LYGO.”                          “_Modeler._

   In a letter dated February 3, 1795, it is said “Spangler will
   set off for Derby tomorrow, he intends walking as it will not be
   so expensive and he may as well be walking to Derby as stay here
   doing nothing.” How long he remained in Derby after this I have
   not ascertained but as Mr. Duesbury died the following year,
   and things went very awkwardly, it is probable he did not long
   remain.

   PIERRE STEPHAN, another Frenchman, was for some years a modeller
   and china maker at Derby, and produced many lovely groups and
   single figures. He removed to Jackfield, where he commenced a
   small pot-works, producing not only earthenware, but encaustic
   tiles. His son, Mr. Peter Stephan, is, at the time I write, a
   skilled modeller at the Coalport China Works. (See page 305,
   vol. I.) By articles of agreement entered into on the 17th
   September, 1770, “between Peter Stephane of Derby in the County
   of Derby, Modeler and China or Porcelaine Repairer of the one
   part and William Duesbury of the same place China or Porcelain
   Manufacturer of the other part” he binds himself for three
   years “to employ himself in the art of Modelling and Repairing
   China or Porcelaine Ware” at £2 12_s._ 6_d._ per week. The
   agreement is signed “Pierre Stephan” and “William Duesbury,”
   and is attested by “Constantine Smith,” “Friederick Decuber,”
   and “Thos. Morgan, Junr.”--names which will be found noticed
   elsewhere. In 1795 Stephan was at Shelton, and while there
   continued to model for and send moulds to Mr. Duesbury.

   FIDELE DUVIVIER, a Frenchman, entered into an engagement with
   the elder Mr. Duesbury in 1769. The agreement (duly signed by
   both Duesbury and Duvivier, and attested by “John Bosher” and
   “S. Horrocks,”) is dated 31st October, 1769, and is “between
   Fidelle Duvivier of the borough of Derby China or Porcelain
   Painter,” and “William Duesbury of the same place China or
   Porcelain Manufacturer,” and covenants that the former shall,
   for four years from that date, “diligently and faithfully
   according to the best and utmost of his skill and knowledge,
   exercise and employ himself in the Art of Painting China or
   Porcelain Ware,” for the weekly wages of 24_s._; Mr. Duesbury
   agreeing, at the end of that time, to give him an additional
   five guineas “in case he shall merit the same.” He became the
   principal flower painter at the Derby Works, and his style
   was much followed by the later painters. Duvivier remained
   some years at Derby, and then left, being afterwards employed
   at Wedgwood’s and various other places. In 1790, being then
   employed at the New Hall Works (which see), he wrote the
   following letter to the then Mr. Duesbury, and in consequence, I
   believe, he returned for a time to Derby:--“Hanley green, the 1
   novebr 1790, Mr. Dousbery, Sir,--take the liberty Adressing you
   with a few lines, as mine Engegement in the new Hal Porcelaine
   manufatory is Expierd, and the propriotors do not intend to
   do much more in the fine line of Painting, therefor think of
   Settling in new Castle under lime being engag’d to teech Drowing
   in the Boarding School at that place, one School I have at
   Stone, so as to have only three days to Spare in the week for
   Painting, wich time Could wish to be employ’d by you preferable
   to eany other fabricque, because you like and understand good
   work, as am inform’d, my painting now to watt I did for your
   father is quit diferent but without flatering my Self, Hope to
   give you Satisfaction, in Case you Schould like to inploy me,
   Sir,--your anser will much oblige your Humble Servant, DUVIVIER
   P.S. the conveyance would be much in fevoir for to Send the ware
   to and from as ther is a waggon Every week from darby to new
   Castle”

   WILLIAM J. COFFEE, a modeller, who “made his mark” at Derby,
   was the son of William Coffee, who worked either at Hempel’s
   or Triquet’s pottery at Chelsea, and afterwards entered into
   domestic service in a gentleman’s family. Coffee was, I believe,
   brought up to some branch of the business with his father at
   these Chelsea works, and was afterwards employed at Coade’s
   Lambeth Pottery.[21] He first came down to Derby, I believe,
   about the year 1791, and agreements were entered into between
   him and Mr. Duesbury. I believe he at first came as a kiln-man.
   He does not, as a modeller, seem to have made much head-way at
   first, and even in 1794 the London agent wrote, “I do not much
   admire Mr. Coffee’s modelling from what I have yet seen. The
   figure No. 359 is one of the most stupid looking things I ever
   saw, and the figure of Apollo in group No. 379 is very vulgar
   about the bosom, for sure never such bubbys was seen and so much
   exposed--the design is pretty enough.” Soon after this a fresh
   agreement was entered into as to prices to be paid for figures
   according to size by the piece, or at day’s wages; Mr. Duesbury
   covenanting to have the option of paying him after the rate
   of 3_s._ 6_d._ per day for each day of 10 hours that he works
   at the manufactory, “or at the rate of 7_s._ for any single
   human figure of 6 inches high, whether standing or in any other
   action, which if standing would be 6 inches high; and that all
   figures shall be roughed out naked in correct proportions before
   draped;” three pence for every half inch additional in height
   being paid, and so on. On the 30th of January, 1795, a fresh
   agreement was entered into:--“Memorandum--Whereas Heads of an
   Agreement between Wm. Coffee and Wm. Duesbury were Executed by
   W. C. and W. D. wherein 6 Months notice was agreed upon between
   them when either wished to close the Agreement--It is hereby
   agreed between W. D. and W. C. that the said Agreement shall
   be cancell’d, and this Agreement stand in its place viz--W.
   C. shall Modell for W. D. untill the 6th of July next at the
   prizes which shall be paid by W. D. to the Modeller he has now
   engaged to come down who is to have 4_s._ pr. day for such work
   as he shall do by the day and various prizes by the piece in
   proportion to their value when he works by the piece in lieu of
   by the day--NB--This Agreement is not to be construed to imploy
   that W. D. has agreed to raise W. C.’s wages by the day above
   3_s._ 6_d._ when he shall chuse to imploy W. C. by the day in
   preferance to his working by the piece--Signed this 30th of
   Jany. 1795. NB--W. C. remarks, that he would wish to know before
   he begins any piece of work whether the said work is to be
   Executed by him by the day or by the piece, W. D. certifies by
   this proviso that such was always his intention--W. COFFEE, W.
   DUESBURY, Witness, Charles King.”

   In the same year Coffee left Derby, and engaged himself with
   Sir Nigel Gresley, Bart., and Mr. Adderley, at their china
   works at Burton-on-Trent,[22] and immediately wrote as follows
   to Mr. Duesbury:--“Burton on Trent J 4 1795, Sir,--My being
   your Debtor makes it my Duty to inform you immediately of my
   arrival here and likewise of my engagement with Sir Nigel
   Gresley and Mr Adderley lest you should suppose that I had
   forgot the Obligation I lie under to you--but am extremely
   sorry to understand that you meant to injure me respecting my
   Business as that would totally deprive my honest intention of
   paying you, the mode of which I shall be happy to submit to
   your own satisfaction when I wait on you, I intend as soon as
   possible.--I am sir your h servant, W. COFFEE.” To this Mr.
   Duesbury returned a manly letter, denying the imputation, asking
   for the name of Coffee’s informant, and assuring him that he has
   only to make the mode of repayment quite convenient to himself.
   In the same year the father of Coffee thus wrote:--“London Sepr
   9th 1795, Sir,--My Son since He left you has been at Work near
   your Manufactory for Sir Nigel Gresley which He says He inform’d
   you of at the time--having finished all there was to do there He
   is now return’d to London and out of Employ. As I was very sorry
   for his leaving you and severely reflected on Him for it--He
   now assures me that He shou’d be extremely happy to serve you
   again--for a constancy if you thought proper under an Article
   for a Term of Years--at the lower rate of 18 or 17 Shillings pr
   week--He gave Sir Nigel the greatest satisaction both in His
   behaviour and in His Business--as a proof of which Sir Nigel
   has offer’d to give Him the best of Characters at any time it
   shou’d be requir’d of Him--therefore Sir you cou’d be satisfied
   in that respect at any time you pleas’d--hoping whatever may
   have happen’d at any time disagreeable your goodness will
   forget--Your condescention in favouring me with an Answer
   directly will much oblige Sir Your most humble Servant WILLIAM
   COFFEE P.S. He is wiling to repair or do what work you think
   proper. I will attend Mr Ligo hopeing your kind Answer.” The
   result was that Coffee returned to Derby; worked at the china
   factory as of old; and afterwards commenced business on his
   own account in Derby. Here he produced terra-cotta figures of
   considerable merit and in tolerable variety. Of these, a wolf,
   a lion, a dog, and others are strikingly good. He stamped his
   productions with his name, “W. COFFEE, DERBY,” and occasionally
   the number, or the date. He also gave lessons in modelling, and
   turned his attention to oil-painting and sculpture. His statue
   of Æsculapius, on the roof of the Infirmary at Derby, was his
   principal work. It was executed in or about 1810.

   RICHARD ASKEW was employed at the Chelsea works when taken to by
   Duesbury, and came from there to Derby in 1772. His name occurs
   regularly in the “weekly bills” at Chelsea where he received
   4_s._ 2_d._ a-day wages. The following is an account for extra
   work done by him:--

                                    £ _s._ _d._
    2 Perfume pots in figuars       1  16   0
    2 Row wagons in figuars         1  10   0
                                   ----------
                                   £3   6   0
        Recid. £2 2_s._            ----------
      April the 30, 1771.          RICHARD ASKEW.

   ROBERT ASKEW, his son, was employed at Derby in 1772, and
   in that year, along with John Laurence, absconded from his
   employment, and was advertised three different times in the
   Birmingham newspapers. In 1794 Askew, “enamel painter of
   Birmingham,” was living in Birmingham (at 8, Friday Street),
   and on the 2nd of August an agreement was drawn up, by which
   he bound himself “to work by the piece in lieu of the day, and
   at prizes mentioned in the ajoining list;” the subjects to be
   executed in the best manner in his power, and not agreeable to
   the coffee cans already executed, viz., Duke of York, King and
   Queen of France, and Spinning Wheel, &c., but in quality and
   effect equal to the Cupids on two flower pots by James Banford
   having R. Askew’s name written upon them (to prevent a mistake
   in alluding to them) in ink, subscribed this day in presence
   of Mr. C. King. The list of prices by the piece, attached to
   the draft of the agreement, is of great interest, but too long
   to insert. The coffee cans here named were some then recently
   painted by Askew, and as the bill for them contains many curious
   items and much valuable information on the Art-productions of
   that day, I give it entire. This bill, and many others which are
   still extant, show that Askew was the principal figure-painter
   employed at the Derby China Works. It is headed, “_Mr. Wilm.
   Duesbury, Deptur to Rich^d. Askew, July 1794_.”

   “a coffe can, with the king of france, one days work     0   5   3
    a coffe can, with the Queen of france, one day          0   5   3
    a coffe can, with a woman spining, one Day              0   5   3
    a coffe can, with the head of the Duke of york, one day 0   5   3
    2 coffe cans, with cupeds, tow Days & a half            0  13   1
    a cadle cup, with a woman & child, tow days             0  10   6
    a cadle cup, with a begar-Girl & child, tow days        0  10   6
    a coffe can, a woman holding flowers siting, a day &
      half                                                  0   7  10
    a flower Pot, with a woman & child, tow days            0  10   6
    a cadle cup, with a woman & a Lion, tow days            0  10   6
    2 coffe cans, figuors of fath & hope, to days & a half  0  13   1
    a cadle cup, with the fourting-teller, three and a
      half days                                             0  18   4
    a coffe can, with the head of the Prince of Wails,
      tow days                                              0  10   6
    a coffe can, with a Girl & bird, one Day & a half       0   7  10
    2 coffee cans, with cupids, tow Days and a half         0  13   1
    a cadle cup, with a woman siting at Woark, tow days     0  10   6
    a cadle cup, with Doatage and beauty, three days        0  15   9
    a cadle cup, with Age and youth, three Days             0  15   9
    2 coffe cans, with cupieds, tow Days and a half         0  13   1
    a coffe can, with a man & woman offiring to Cuped,
      3 days & a half                                       0  18   4
    a coffe can, with cupied chiding Venus, 3 days & a half 0  18   4
    2 cadle cups, first & scount lasson of love, Eaght Days 2   2   0
    a Plate, with a head, half a Day                        0   2   7
    a cup & scarcer, with landsceps, one Day                0   5   3
    a coffe can, with a Girl & a Rabbet, tow Days           0  10   6
    a coffe can, with bebe & Eagle, tow Days                0  10   6
    2 coffe cans, with the Prince of Wails & Dutches of
      york, 4 days                                          1   1   0
    a coffe can, with maid of Corinth, four Days            1   1   0
    a coffe can, with love sleeps, four Days                1   1   0
    a coffe can, with sapho & cuped, 3 Days & a half        0  18   4
    a coffe can, with a offering to cuped, 3 Days & a half  0  18   4
    for Drawings, tow Days & a half                         0  13   1
    a cup & sacer, in brown, half a day                     0   2   7
    a coffe can, in brown, half a Day                       0   2   7
    a Plate, with Plamon & lavinea, 3 Days                  0  15   9
    2 coffe cans, with single figuars, tow Days             0  10   6
    a Plate, with a cupied & Emblems, tow Days & half       0  13   1
    12 Tea cups, in brown figuars, three Days & a half      0  18   4
    a Plate, with a cupied only, a Day & a half             0   7  10
    8 coffe cans, single figuars, Eight Days                2   2   0
    2 coffe cans, with figuars, Day & a half Each           1  11   6
    4 coffe cans, with the four Elements, 4 Days Each       4   4   0
    to three weekes Drawing of cupieds                      4  14   6
    4 coffe cans, with figuars, a Day & half Each           1   3   7
    4 coffe cans, with figuars, a Day & half Each           1  10   6
    a coffe can, with the Duke o york, tow Days             0  10   6
    a Pair, with figuars, 5 Days                            1   6   3
    2 chamber Pots, with cupieds in the inside, 4 days      1   1   0
    a coffe can, with the Prince of Wails                   0  10   6
    to Drawing of cupieds, 5 Days                           1   6   3
    a stand, with cupieds, in Rose couler, Day & half       0   7  10
    a cram Pot, in D^o, half a Day                          0   2   7
    a cram Pot, with figuar in brown, half a Day            0   2   7
    4 coffe cans, with dancing figuars, 5 Days              1   6   3
    4 coffe cans, with the Elements, 4 Days                 4   4   0
    a cadle cup, with a woman & children a brakefarst,
      3 Days & half                                         0  18   4
    a cadle cup in D^o, at supper, 3 Days & a half          0  18   4
    a stand, a tay Pot, 2 coffe cans, a sugar Bason and
      cram Pot, work warry heily & neatly finish^d by
      Pertickler Desier, 5 weekes                           7  17   6
    5 cups, in landskips, 2 Days                            0  10   6
                                                         ------------
                                                          £61   0   4
                                                         ------------
    the subjects on the stad, 3 womans & cupied tyde to a tree.
    on the coffe cans, to woman offereng to Pan & to woman awaking
      of cupied.
    on the Tea Pot, maid of Corinth & love sleeps.
    on the sugar-Bason, Euphorsnay & cuped.
    on the crame Pot, a flying cupied.
                                         Dilevered October the 3, 1795.
                                                         £ _s._ _d._
     1.  2 coffe cans, with the King & Queen of france   0  10   0
     2.  1 Do, with the duke of yorke                    0   5   0
     3.  1 D^o, with the spining weele                   0   3   0
     4.  2 D^o, with Cupets                              0  10   0
     5.  1 cadle cup, with a woman & child               0   7   0
     6.  1 D^o, with Begar Girl & child                  0   7   0
     7.  1 coffe cup, with a woman siting                0   5   0
     8.  a flower Pot, with a woman & cupet              0   9   0
     9.  a Cadle cup, with Hosea & a Leon                0   7   0
    10.  2 coffe cans, with hope & fath                  0  10   0
    11.  a cadle cupe, with the fortin teller            0  14   0
    12.  a coffe can, with a head of the Prince of Wales 0   7   6
    13.  a coffe can, with a Girl & bird                 0   5   0
    14.  a cadle cup, with a woman siting at work        0   7   0
    15.  a cadle cup, with doatage & beauty              0  12   0
    16.  D^o, with age and youth                         0  12   0
    17.  2 coffe cans, with cupets                       0  10   0
    18.  2 cadle cups, first & secont leson of love      1   8   0
    19.  2 coffe cans, with venus and cupet &
           sacrafise to love                             1  10   0
    20.  a Plate, with hand                              0   2   0
    21.  a cup & saucer, with Landsceps                  0   6   0
    22.  2 coffe cans, hebe & the child & rabbet         0  18   0
    23.  2 coffe cans, with heads of the Prince of
           Wales & Dss of York                           0  15   0
    24.  a coffe can, with the maid of corneth           0  15   0
    25.  a coffe can, with love slepes                   0  15   0
    26.  a coffe can, with sappho to Phaon               0  15   0
    27.  a coffe can, with offering to cupet             0  15   0
    28.  for Drawings                                    0  12   0
        Deliverd. November the 26, 94.                ------------
                          RICHARD ASKEW.               £15  11   6
                                                      ------------

   WILLIAM BILLINGSLEY, whose name is more intimately mixed up
   with the history of porcelain than most of his contemporaries,
   was a china painter of unusual excellence, and a practical
   maker as well. Like many another man of genius, he was,
   however, unstable and erratic in his movements; but to this
   very quality we are indebted for the establishment of more than
   one eminent manufactory. To him and his practical skill is due
   the establishment of china-works at Pinxton, at Mansfield, at
   Nantgarw, and at Swansea, and to some extent the improvement
   of the ware at Coalport and at Worcester, as well as much of
   the high class of decoration at the old Derby Works; and he has
   thus “left his mark” on the history of Ceramic Art. Billingsley
   was a man of great genius, of extraordinary talent, of extreme
   ability as an artist, and of skill as a practical potter; but
   wanting stability, he became but a living illustration of the
   adage which says “a rolling stone gathers no moss.” He settled
   only for a very short time anywhere before he again moved; but
   wherever he did remain, if only for a short time, he left the
   impress of his name and the most indisputable evidence of his
   skill behind him. William Billingsley was the eldest son of
   William and Mary Billingsley, of the parish of St. Alkmund,
   Derby. He was baptized in that church on the 12th of October,
   1758. The following is the entry of his birth:--“1758, Oct.
   12, Baptized, William, the son of--Billingsley and--his wife.”
   Other entries in the register show that the names of his parents
   were “William” and “Mary.” His father died in March, 1770, when
   he was only twelve years of age.[23] Four years afterwards,
   on the 26th of September, 1774, when sixteen years of age, he
   was bound apprentice to William Duesbury. In the indenture he
   is described as “William Billingsley, son of Mary Billingsley,
   of Derby, in the county of Derby,” and he is bound apprentice
   for five years to “William Duesbury, of Derby aforesaid,
   China or Porcelain Maker,” to “learn the Art of Painting upon
   China or Porcelain Ware.” He was to receive as wages five
   shillings per week for the whole time of his servitude; not an
   advancing scale year by year as was usual. The indenture is
   signed by “William Billingsley,” “Mary Billingsley,” and “Wm.
   Duesbury,” in the presence of “Wm. Clarke.” To Mr. Duesbury
   he served the full time of his apprenticeship, during which
   time he received considerable instruction as a painter, from
   Zachariah Boreman,[24] one of the best artists of the old
   Chelsea Works, who had removed with those works to Derby. On
   the 4th of November, 1780, William Billingsley, then just over
   twenty-two years of age, married, at St. Alkmund’s Church,
   Derby, Sarah Rigley, of that parish, by whom he had several
   children, three of whom were baptised at St. Alkmund’s Church.
   On the expiration of his apprenticeship, William Billingsley
   continued in the service of Mr. Duesbury, and by his extreme
   skill as a flower-painter became the best artist in that line
   of decoration. In 1785, Mr. Duesbury died; and the business
   was carried on by his son, with whom Billingsley and other
   artists remained for some years. Soon after this time some
   correspondence having taken place between Mr. Duesbury and Mr.
   Coke concerning the properties of a bed of clay at Pinxton,
   in Derbyshire, which it was considered would be useful for
   the manufacture of china, trials were made, which ultimately
   resulted in Billingsley making an arrangement with Mr. Coke for
   the establishment of a manufactory at that place (see Pinxton).

   Billingsley’s name frequently occurs in papers and memoranda
   relating to the Derby China Works in my possession, and certain
   patterns and designs in the old pattern-books of the works
   are distinguished as “Billingsley’s flowers.” As it is highly
   interesting to know what artists and other principal “hands”
   were employed at the same time as, and worked along with,
   William Billingsley, I give the following copy of a document
   relating to the keeping of the men employed on one part of the
   works from entering any other part:--“Derby China Manufactory,
   23rd Nov., 1787. If any person in Future, either within the
   working Hours or at any other time, is seen or discover’d in
   the Rooms, Kilns, Apartments, or other Premises of the other
   (not having any proper Business relative to his particular
   Occupation there) he will positively be fined the sum of five
   Shillings. The Fines (if any are incur’d) to be put into the Box
   of Donations at pay time, on the Saturday after the detection.

    “J. Duesbury.
    Boreman.
    Smith.
    Billingsley.
    Stables.
    Jno. Yates.
    Wm. do.
    Longdon.
    Tayler.
    Blood.
    Cooper.
    Butler.
    Soar.
    Dickinson.
    Kay.
    Fogg.
    Webster.
    Clarke.
    Barton.
    Mason.
    M. do.
    Atkins.
    Wedgwood.
    Ash.
    Morledge.
    Watthews.
    Lawrence.
    Whitaker.
    Porter.
    T. Moore.
    Shipley.
    B. Orme.
    -----[26]
    Wells.
    Keen.
    Parish.
    Spooner.
    Son.
    Wardle.
    Rogers.
    Musgrove.
    Morrell.
    Robins.
    Horsley.
    Green.
    Lovegrove.
    Whitiall.
    G. Holmes.
    Hill.
    Farnsworth.
    Whitaker.
    Laurance.
    Atkins.
    Morledge.
    Wedgwood.
    Ash.
    Wathews.
    Ball.
    Thos. Soare.[27]
    Jos. Stables.
    Wm. Cooper.
    Jno. Yates.
    Wm. Billingsley.
    Jno. Blood.
    Wm. Yates.
    Wm. Longdon.
    Wm. Taylor.
    Jno. Buttler.
    Wm. Smith.
    Z. Boreman.”

   Again, in 1788:--

   “In November last notice was given that persons of _one_ branch
   of the manufactory were not to go into the premises of the
   _other_, unless they had real business there relative to theire
   _particular occupation_, notwithstanding which the practice
   is still by some Individuals continued. Notice is therefore
   hereby _finally_ given, that if any person in future (having
   received this Notice) shall intrude themselves contrary to this
   injunction they will positively be fined 5 shillings.

    “Sept. 24th, 88.

    “Boreman.
    Billingsley.
    Jno. Yates.
    Wm. do.
    Taylor.
    Smith.
    Borton.
    T. Rogers.
    T. Simes.
    Webster.
    Soare.
    Stables.
    Cooper.
    Josph. Doe.
    Longdon.
    Blood.
    Buttler.
    Key.
    Fogg.
    Clarke.
    Dickinson.
    M. Mason.
    Shirley, Arthr.”

   The following is also an interesting document, signed by
   Billingsley along with other artists:--“From the many injuries
   done to the trade by employing Women in Painting of China, &c.,
   Particularly not being employ’d in London in any Painting or
   Gilding Shop whatsoever, we hope you will not withstand Granting
   us the favour of their not being employ’d here.

    “Edwd. Withers.
    Samuel Keys.
    Jno. Brown.
    Wm. Cooper.
    Wm. Longdon.
    Wm. Yates.
    Thos. Rogers.
    Benj. Brocklesby.
    Jos. Stables.
    Billingsley.
    Soare.
    Jno. Yates.
    Wm. Taylor.”

   In this matter of opposition to the employment of women
   Billingsley seems, later on, to have relented, as will be seen
   by the following very nice letter from Bernice Banford, one of
   the female painters employed, and wife of one of the men:--“Sir,
   I hope you will excuse me for takeing the liberty to trouble
   you again, as my motive for writeing is to Return you thanks
   for the Favour you was pleased to confer in allowing me some
   work. I have only painted 4 Dozen and 3 plates, at 3_d._ each,
   which I believe is Charged Right, but know not whether I am
   so happy to merit your approbation in the Performance. Mr.
   John Duesbury would have sent me more work, but Mr. Banford
   Declin’d it till your return, as all the men (Mr. Bilinsley and
   Mr. Complin Excepted) treated him in a very unbecoming manner,
   and even threaten’d him if the work was continu’d to me, which
   would at this time be of the greatest service to my Family, and
   should be very happy to contribute to its support. Pardon me,
   Sir, if I presume to say I am certain one word from you would
   ease their Doubts and effectually silence them. I am, Sir, with
   the greatest Respect, your Obliged, Humble Servt., BERNICE
   BANFORD.--March ye 3.”

   Billingsley appears to have been paid from about £1 10_s._ to £2
   per week at the Derby China Works, and several of his accounts
   and receipts are in my possession. In one of these (September
   23rd, 1793), the balance due to him being £34 7_s._ 2_d._, he
   asks for “a draft on London for £30 at twenty-one days’ date,”
   on account, as usual, and acknowledges to having “lost some
   little time, which in some degree differs from our agreement,
   but it has been a matter of necessity, not choice;” and states
   that as he shall “in the course of a fortnight quit the public
   business,”--he at this time, as I gather, being landlord of a
   public-house (the “Nottingham Arms” in Bridgegate, Derby)--he
   shall be able to make up the time so lost. Again, receipts in
   1793–4–5, show that he was still at that time in Mr. Duesbury’s
   employ in Derby. It may be well, before proceeding further,
   to say that, from a curious draft of an order to the painters
   employed at the Derby China Works, in my own possession, William
   Billingsley’s number which he was supposed from that time (not
   long before he left) to mark on such pieces as he painted was
   7. The document is so curious, and will be so interesting to
   collectors, that I give it entire. It is as follows, and is in
   the second William Duesbury’s own handwriting:--

   “Every Painter to mark underneath each Article he may finish,
   the number corresponding to his name, and any other mark which
   may be required, in such manner as he may be directed (viz.):--

    Thos. Soar                                  1
    Jos. Stables                                2
    Wm. Cooper                                  3
    Wm. Yates                                   4
    Jno. Yates                                  5
                                                6
    William Billingsley                         7
    Wm. Longdon                                 8
    Wm. Smith                                   9
    Jno. Blood                                 10
    Wm. Taylor (except on blue and white)      11
    Jno. Duesbury                              12
    Jos. Dodd                                  13

   The Painter in fine blue, and in laying grounds to use for his
   mark the like colours.

    Ditto, in other colours      Orange-red.
    Ditto, in Gold               Purple.

   “On omission of the above Injunctions, for the first Offence
   (after this public notice), the person so offending shall
   forfeit to the Box which contains donations for the Manufactory
   at large, one-fourth of the value of the Article or Articles
   found to be deficient in marking; for the second, one-half
   of the value; and for the third, the whole of the value, and
   discharged the Manufactory. And if any Painter is found working
   at any hour contrary to those already appointed for Business,
   without Permission or Orders, such person shall, for the first
   offence forfeit to the Box 6_d._; for the second, 1_s._; for the
   third, 2_s._, and so on, doubling each time.”

   In 1795 Billingsley determined upon bringing his connection
   with the Derby China Works to an end, and for that purpose
   gave notice to his employer, Mr. Duesbury. Knowing how ill he
   could be spared from the decorative part of the manufactory,
   his employer endeavoured to retain his services, and, not
   unnaturally, put various obstacles in the way of his leaving
   Billingsley; however seems to have determined on the removal,
   and much to his credit that that removal should be an honourable
   one. The following letter shows his determination:--

   “SIR,--From the circumstance that occurr’d when I was last
   in Conversation with you, I am induc’d to take this mode of
   informing you of my opinion on the subject then in question.
   My opinion is, that I have fulfill’d the warning[28] I gave
   (my reasons in support of which it is not necessary to advance
   at this time). But as I am inform’d that you believe I have
   some further time to work for you before the Warning is
   fulfill’d--namely, to make up the time I lost in the six months
   I was under warning, and as it is my wish to leave no ground
   for dissatisfaction, I take this opportunity of informing you
   that I am willing to come and Work that time according to that
   opinion of the case. If the foregoing is according to your
   opinion and desire, your being so kind as to send me advise to
   that effect at any time in the course of a week, and likewise
   the time I have to work according to the rule and opinion above
   stated, I will attend your works accordingly. If I do not hear
   from you in the course of the time above stated, I must then
   conclude that you are satisfy’d, and the information that I have
   receiv’d is without foundation. I am, Sir, your Humble Serv.,
   WM. BILLINGSLEY.--Derby, Oct. 14, 1796.”

   Shortly before this time Mr. Joseph Lygo, the London agent and
   manager of the business of the Derby China Works, wrote to
   his employer, Mr. Duesbury:--“I hope you will be able to make
   a bargain with Mr. Billingsley for him to continue with you,
   for it will be a great loss to lose such a hand, and not only
   that, but his going into another factory will put them in the
   way of doing flowers in the same way, which they are at present
   entirely ignorant of.” Despite all this, Billingsley left the
   Derby China Works, where he had been apprenticed, and in which
   he had worked for twenty-two years, and in 1796 commenced, for
   or with Mr. Coke, a small manufactory at Pinxton, near Alfreton.
   Here his practical skill stood him in good service, and the
   experiments he had long tried in china bodies were brought
   to bear satisfactory results. He succeeded in producing a
   granular body (the fracture having much the appearance of fine
   loaf-sugar), very soft, but of extreme beauty. Here Billingsley
   remained for about four years only, removing in 1800 to
   MANSFIELD, where he started a small concern, which he continued
   for about three or four years longer. Having once become
   unsettled by his removal from Derby, Billingsley does not appear
   ever afterwards to have rested long in any one place. In 1804 he
   is stated to have commenced, or joined, some small china works
   at TORKSEY in Lincolnshire; and a few years later he appears to
   have started a china manufactory at WIRKSWORTH in Derbyshire--no
   doubt being in part actuated in locating himself there through
   the fact of the existence of a beautiful white clay being found
   in connection with the lead mines at Brassington and other
   places in its neighbourhood. In 1811 Billingsley removed to
   Worcester, where he engaged himself with Messrs. Flight and
   Barr, of the Worcester China Works. Here, as in some of his
   other migrations, he was accompanied by his son-in-law, George
   Walker, the husband of his daughter Sarah. Of the engagement of
   these two at WORCESTER, Mr. Binns says: “In 1811, Billingsley,
   the Derby artist, came to Worcester. As a clever flower-painter,
   he was no doubt an acquisition, but that does not appear to have
   been the object of his visit. Billingsley knew something of
   making porcelain, and was possessed of a receipt which there is
   no doubt he valued very highly. From Messrs. Flight and Barr’s
   letter to Mr. Dillwyn, it would appear that he had endeavoured
   to introduce this special body at Worcester, but we do not think
   he was allowed to interfere to any extent in the manufacturing
   department. Walker, Billingsley’s companion and son-in-law,
   introduced a more important invention to the Worcester Works in
   the _reverberating enamel kiln_. These kilns had been in use
   in London and at Derby, but were now for the first time built
   at Worcester. Up to this time iron muffles were used, but from
   their arrangement requiring a preparatory kiln or muffle, after
   the same manner as the annealing oven of a glass-house, they
   were most objectionable, the ware having to be removed from one
   to the other whilst very hot. Previous to this iron muffle, a
   more original muffle still was used. The description given
   to us quite accords with the engraving in Biancourt, with the
   exception of the arrangement of the fire. In the old Worcester
   kilns the space between the bricks and the iron case was filled
   with small pieces of charcoal, and when the iron cover was
   finally placed, it was also covered with charcoal; the fire was
   then applied to the centre of the cover, and gradually extended
   all over and down the sides until it got to the bottom; the
   object of this arrangement was to get an equal heat all over,
   which would not have been the case had the bottom been heated
   first. The method of building these new enamel kilns was kept
   as a great secret, Walker always working by night. He built
   them both for Messrs. Flight and Barr and Messrs. Chamberlain.”
   After remaining two years only at Worcester, in 1813 Billingsley
   and Walker (the former under a name he had for cogent reasons
   assumed--that of _Beeley_, this name being a contraction of
   his own B[illings]ley, or B’ley, otherwise _Beeley_) left that
   place and went to NANTGARW, a small, out-of-the-way village
   in Glamorganshire, near Pontypridd, where they established
   themselves and commenced making china. From here they sent up a
   specimen of their ware to Government,[29] to show their special
   body, and to seek Government aid; and the Board of Trade,
   through Sir Joseph Banks, requested Mr. Dillwyn, of the Swansea
   pot-works, to visit Nantgarw and report on the quality of the
   ware. This visit of Mr. Dillwyn’s resulted in his entering
   into an arrangement with Billingsley and Walker to transfer
   themselves and their works to SWANSEA, where he built a small
   manufactory for them, closely adjoining his other works. Not
   long after this Mr. Dillwyn received a notice from Messrs.
   Flight and Barr, of Worcester, informing him that Billingsley
   and Walker “had clandestinely left their service,” and warning
   him not to employ them. This occurred, I believe, in about two
   years from the time of founding the Swansea China Works, and on
   Mr. Dillwyn being assured by Messrs. Flight and Barr that china
   with the granulated body could not be made to be commercially
   successful, he gave up the manufacture, and dismissed
   Billingsley and Walker, who then at once returned to Nantgarw,
   where they resumed their manufacture of china, and produced many
   beautiful services and pieces, which now fetch remarkably high
   prices. The productions of this small manufactory having found
   their way into some of the best London dealers’ hands, Mr. Rose,
   of the Coalport China Works, feeling that the Nantgarw trade, if
   allowed to continue, would seriously affect his business, went
   over to Nantgarw, and after some negotiation, made a permanent
   engagement with Billingsley and Walker, and bought up from them
   at once their stock, their moulds, and their receipt for the
   body, and removed them and all their belongings (as he did also
   those of Swansea) to COALPORT. Thus the manufacture of Nantgarw
   porcelain, just as it was approaching perfection and becoming
   known, was, unfortunately, at once and for ever closed.

   William Billingsley remained at Coalport[30]--living in a small
   cottage a short distance on the Shiffnal Road--for the rest of
   his days, which, however, were but few in number. In 1827 or
   1828 (I am uncertain which), this remarkable man--one of the
   _most_ remarkable in the whole line of English potters, and one
   to whose artistic genius the exquisite decorations of some of
   the Derby and of the Worcester productions are indebted, and to
   whose practical skill and life-long energies so many important
   factories owed their origin--passed away in complete obscurity
   and in much greater poverty than his talents deserved.

   George Walker, after the death of William Billingsley, removed
   with his family to America, where he founded and built a
   manufactory in New Troy, which he called “Temperance Hill
   Pottery,” at which he and his family were, I am enabled to add
   from reliable information, working to great advantage a few
   years ago, and where, I believe, they still continue.

   JONATHAN WEDGWOOD, “of the Borough of Derby, China or Porcelain
   Repairer or Thrower,” was employed for some time at the Derby
   Works. On the 2nd of December, 1772, articles of agreement[31]
   were drawn up between him and William Duesbury, by which he
   was to serve Mr. Duesbury for three years “in the Arts of
   Repairing or Throwing China or Porcelain Ware,” at the weekly
   wages of fourteen shillings “for every whole week” he “shall
   work according to the usual hours of Repairing at the said Wm
   Duesbury’s Manufactory in Derby aforesaid.” In the contested
   election of 1776, a John Wedgwood, son of William Wedgwood, of
   St. Peter’s Parish, Derby, claimed, through apprenticeship, to
   be admitted and vote as a freeman, and before the Committee of
   the House of Commons, was accordingly admitted. By the registers
   of St. Alkmund’s, Derby, it appears that a Jonathan Wedgwood was
   married on the 12th November, 1785--thirteen years after the
   date of this agreement--to Mary Stenson; and that three years
   before this time, 22nd Sept. 1782, an Amy Wedgwood was married
   to Abijah Tyrrell, both of that parish. The probability is that
   the Jonathan Wedgwood whose agreement I have quoted was born at
   Ellenborough in 1735; that he migrated to Burslem (where one of
   his children was born in 1757), and afterwards to Derby; and the
   Jonathan and Amy, whose marriages are noted, were his son and
   daughter. His name appears as one of the workmen in 1787.

   Other artists, &c., were as follows:--

   JOHN ASH, a thrower and presser in 1794.

   JOSEPH BANCROFT, who belonged to the old Derbyshire family of
   Bancroft, of Swarkestone and elsewhere, was apprenticed at the
   Derby Works, and became a proficient in painting flowers, birds,
   insects, and shells. He did not remain long after the expiration
   of his apprenticeship, but worked for Copelands and others, and
   lastly for Minton’s, in whose employ he died.

   JAMES BANFORD, of London, a clever painter, was employed from
   1790 till 1795. He removed from London to Derby in the middle
   of 1790, his wife, Bernice Banford, and family following him
   in August of that year. He appears, from penitent letters, to
   have been, like many of the other hands, addicted to drinking,
   and to have been of improvident habits. In one of his letters
   (Feb. 1, 1794) he says, “I cannot help informing you that I
   have been dissatisfied some time at the difference of wages
   between Mr. Boreman and self. I am not conceited of my work, but
   every man knows what he is capable of doing, and in any line of
   painting china except landscapes, I have the advantage of Mr. B.
   Cannot help observing that in the landscape line, when there is
   anything minute or requires neatness, my optic nerves are to be
   strained for 18_s._ pr week less, and tim’d to ten hours each
   day at the manufactory.”

   BERNICE BANFORD, wife of James Banford, china painter, was also
   employed as a painter, but at her own house or lodgings. She
   had a somewhat unsteady husband and a family to look after,
   and seems to have been a great help to them. Here is her first
   letter, asking for work, showing that she had been employed at
   Wedgwood’s works in London; and another letter by her, when
   objection was taken to her being so employed, is given on page
   103. “S^{IR}, I beg pardon for addressing you on a Subject which
   nesessety oblidge’s me to which is to Solicit the favour of a
   little work in the painting way at home, I was brought up to the
   business at Mr. Wedgwoods manufactory in London, and flatter
   my Self I should be able to do the Slightest paterns on China.
   I would S^{ir} very willinly Contribute any thing towards the
   Suport of my family, and to assist my Husband to pay Some Debts
   which we owe in Derby, which if I Should be so happy to obtain
   Such a favour I Doubt not but we Should be soon able to Effect
   and do better for our Family than at present. if S^{ir} you
   would please to take it into Consideration by Permiting me a
   little work, you would for Ever oblidge, S^{ir} your Hume Sert,
   BERNICE BANFORD.”

   W. BARKER, formerly of London, was employed between six and
   seven years at the Derby Works, and left them in March, 1795.

   RICHARD BARTON, the manager at Chelsea (it is he who makes out
   all the “weekly bills” and receives and pays) was a modeller. In
   1773 “Barton, modling 2 small antiquit vauses, £1 1_s._”

   JOHN BLOOD was an apprentice at the Derby works, and became a
   clever painter.

   ROBERT BLORE, a late apprentice at the Derby works, afterwards
   for a time produced on his own account small figures, vases,
   &c., at a small place in Bridge Gate; he removed into
   Staffordshire.

   ZACHARIAH BOREMAN, one of the old Chelsea painters, employed by
   Spremont, and afterwards by Duesbury, and came down to Derby
   on the closing of those works, was for some time employed. In
   1784 he left Derby and returned to London; but about 1794 fresh
   articles of agreement were entered into, and a supplemental
   agreement drawn up same day covenanted that “wherever three
   shillings and sixpence per day occurs in the aforesaid
   agreement, the words ‘seven shillings’ shall be inserted in Z
   Boreman’s agreement, when regularly executed on stamps.” He
   was to employ himself in painting, and in improving the enamel
   colours, &c. He is said to have died in London in 1810.

   R. B. BOWMAN, of Goswell Street, London, was engaged by articles
   of agreement, dated May 6th, 1793, to come down to Derby, and
   agreed to be there in three weeks from the 12th of that month.
   A week afterwards, however, he begged to have the agreement
   cancelled, as he had had “a beneficial offer in London, in the
   engraving branch,” at 30_s._ a week.

GEORGE BRADBURY, son of William Bradbury, of Little Chester, Labourer,
was bound apprentice on the 10th of March, 1765, for seven years, to
“William Duesbury of Derby aforesaid (altered by the pen to “in the
said county”) China or Porcelain Maker,” “to learn the Art of Repairing
China or Porcelain Ware.” (The indenture is printed on a skin of
parchment; the name “William Duesbury, of Derby, China or Porcelain
[     ],” being printed with the rest, and a blank left for writing in
“maker,” “painter,” or the like.)

   THOMAS BRENTNALL, a flower-painter.

   JOHN BREWER, an artist of repute in London, who had previously,
   as early as 1782, been employed by Mr. Duesbury, was engaged
   by him in 1795, and removed with his family to Derby. He was
   engaged to paint figures, animals, landscapes, and flowers by
   the piece, a schedule of prices being drawn up for that purpose;
   and to be assured that he should not have less than a guinea and
   a half a week for the first year, and two guineas afterwards.
   Until his engagement with Mr. Duesbury he had not painted on
   china, and therefore had to make himself acquainted with the art
   after his arrival. Brewer later on gave lessons in drawing in
   Derby, and in 1811 held an exhibition of his drawings:--

   “Mr. Brewer most respectfully informs the Nobility, Gentry,
   Clergy, and others in Derby and its vicinity, that he has
   arranged for their inspection his Specimens of Water-colour
   Paintings as an Exhibition, consisting of more than two
   hundred different Subjects, many of them quite new, and the
   whole designed and painted by himself, which he hopes during
   the interval of time not given to the festival will afford an
   agreeable change of amusement. May be viewed from 8 in the
   morning until dark at his house near St. Mary’s Bridge, Bridge
   Gate, Derby. Admittance--Ladies and Gentlemen 1s., Children half
   price. Mr. Brewer’s pupils free, also purchasers of Drawings.”

    _Finished from April 29th._
    2 Coffee cans and stands, Shipping N       1
    6 Plates of plants                         2
    4 Comports of Landscapes                   3
    6 Comports of plants                       4
    2 Comports of plants                       5
    2 Coffee Cans Moonlight and fire           6
    2 Coffee Cans and stands Birds             7
    2 Tea pots Landscapes from Gilpin          8
    1 Dejuneé of Birds                         9
    20 Plates of Rose border                  10
    1 Cream jug of Birds                      11
    1 Sugar bason Do.                         12
    2 Cabinet cups 1st and 2d Lesson of Love  13
    12 Coffee cups of Landscapes              14
    12 Plates of Landscapes                   15
    3 Comports Do.                            16
    1 Tea pot of Birds                        17
    --
    83 Pieces to Sept^{br}. 8th.

    _In hand._
    2 Comports of plants.
    4 Plates of do.
    4 Coffee Cans of flowers.
    1 Dejuneé of Ships.
    1 Comport of Landscape, finished.
    1 Cream jug Birds
    1 Tea pot Do.
    12 Saucers Landscapes.
    2 Cans shipping.
    1 Cream jug Do.
    1 Sugar Bason Do.
    --
    30 Sept. 8th.

    JN_o. BREWER.

   ROBERT BREWER is stated to have been a brother to John Brewer.
   He was a pupil of Paul Sanby. On leaving the Derby works he
   commenced practising as a drawing master, and died in 1857.

   BENJAMIN BROCKLESBY, son of John Brocklesby, of Derby, labourer,
   was apprenticed, for seven years, on the 16th of September,
   1783, to learn “the Art or Business of Painting Porcelain or
   China Ware.” On the 24th of August, 1787 (Mr. Duesbury, to
   whom he had been apprenticed, having died on the 30th October,
   1786) he absconded, and on the 13th January, 1789, a warrant
   was issued for his apprehension, and endorsed to be executed in
   Middlesex and Westminster.

   GEORGE BROUGHTON, a painter.

   THOMAS BROUGHTON, painter, 1776.

   JOSEPH BULLOCK, son of Joseph Bullock, of the borough of Derby,
   Framework Knitter, was bound apprentice on the 23rd September,
   1765, by the same printed indentures “to learn the Art of
   Painting upon China or Porcelain ware.”

   SEBASTIAN CLAIS, a Frenchman, was employed as a painter about
   1772–9.

   JAMES CLARKE, a painter and gilder, was apprenticed, and for
   nearly 30 years remained, at the works.

   WILLIAM CLEAVEY was also an apprentice, and became a
   flower-painter.

   GEORGE COCKER, born in Derby in 1794, was apprenticed at the
   Derby Works about 1808, as a figure maker, and continued to work
   there till 1817, when he removed to Coalport, where he is said
   to have been much employed in making raised flowers. He next, in
   connection with two partners, also workmen, commenced a small
   manufactory at Jackfield, which, however, was closed in a few
   months. He then got employment at the Worcester works, and in
   1821 returned to Derby and again worked at the Derby China Works
   till 1826. In that year he left, and in partnership with another
   of the “hands,” Thomas Whitaker, commenced a china manufactory
   in Friar Gate, Derby, under the style of “Cocker and Whitaker.”
   The following is the announcement of the opening of these
   works:--

   “DERBY.--NEW CHINA WORKS, _For the Manufacture of Porcelain
   Figures, Ornaments, &c._--MESSRS. COCKER and WHITAKER beg
   most respectfully to inform the nobility, gentry, and the
   public, that they have commenced the above business in FRIAR
   GATE, DERBY, where they manufacture, and have now ready for
   inspection, and sale, a numerous assortment of Goods in Biscuit
   and Enamel, such as they hope will be found not inferior to
   anything of the kind at present produced in this kingdom.

   “Messrs. C. and W. have also a variety of TEA and DESSERT
   SERVICES of modern and approved patterns; and by arrangements
   already made, and a strict attention to the orders with which
   they may be favoured, they hope to obtain the honor of that
   patronage they now venture to solicit, and which it will ever be
   their most earnest endeavour to merit.

   “N.B.--Ladies or Gentlemen may have Figures, Ornaments, &c.
   executed from models or drawings of their own.

   “Friar Gate, Derby, Feb. 28, 1826.”

   Their place of business was at the bottom of Friar Gate, near
   St. Werburgh’s church; Cocker living on the opposite side of
   the street, a little higher up, where he erected a kiln and
   all the necessary appliances. The business, however, did not
   answer well; the partnership with Whitaker was terminated;
   and in 1840 Cocker removed with his family to London. Here,
   in Chenies Street, Tottenham Court Road, he carried on his
   business of china figure making, and had a small shop in
   Regent’s Quadrant for their sale. This again not answering, he,
   in 1853, obtained an engagement with Messrs. Minton and removed
   to Stoke-upon-Trent, where he died, at the age of 74, in 1868,
   His figures and busts, of which he produced a goodly variety,
   were of small size, and were produced both in biscuit and
   painted. They were very clever and meritorious. He also made,
   rather extensively, as they met a ready sale, small baskets
   of beautifully-formed raised flowers; and brooches and other
   trinkets in the same way. In these he was assisted by his sons,
   daughters, and nephew. Groups of animals were also produced.

   GEORGE COMPLIN was one of the most noted painters at the works,
   many of his landscapes being of high character. He must have
   been an old man in 1794, for in one of his letters (Sept. 18) of
   that year he says, “I think my hair admits of more respect.” In
   the same letter he speaks of his employment, “the variety I do,
   and the variableness of the work.”

   WILLIAM COOPER was a clever flower painter, 1770–76.

   WILLIAM COOPER, son of Sarah Cooper, of Derby, was apprenticed
   for seven years on the 1st of January, 1777, to learn the “Art
   of Painting upon China or Porcelain Ware.” His father also,
   I believe, had been employed at the works about 1770, to his
   death, in 1776.

   WILLIAM CORDEN, born at Ashbourne, 28th Nov. 1797, and was
   apprenticed to the Derby China Works in 1811. He remained some
   time after the conclusion of his apprenticeship, and then
   commenced as a miniature and portrait painter. In 1829 he was
   employed in painting portraits at Windsor Castle, and from that
   time continued to receive royal commissions. In 1843 he was
   employed to paint by the Queen, and in the following year was
   sent by the Prince Consort to the Castle of Rosenau, in Coburg,
   to copy family portraits for him. He died at Nottingham, 18th
   June 1867. A workman named Corden was also connected with the
   Liverpool pot-works.

   WILLIAM COTTON, a painter of landscapes and rural scenes, in the
   early part of this century.

   WILLIAM CRESSWELL, a flower-painter.

   J. DEARE was a modeller of considerable note, in London, and was
   employed by Duesbury to model various groups and figures in 1784.

   WILLIAM DEXTER, a fruit, flower, and bird painter; became a
   noted enamel painter and draughtsman. He died in 1860, and
   his wife--Mrs. Dexter--was the celebrated costume lecturer on
   “Bloomerism.”

   RICHARD DODSON, a clever painter of birds, was the son of
   William Dodson, one of the late foremen.

   WILLIAM DIXON, a painter of humorous figure subjects.

   JOHN DUESBURY, overlooker and private timekeeper.

   ELIN was a painter and gilder from 1786 to 1795.

   J. FARNSWORTH was an apprentice, and remained when out of his
   time. He died in 1822.

   JOHN FROST, son of William Frost, of Nottingham, was bound
   apprentice to Edward Phillips, “China or Porcelain Painter,”
   on the 16th of April, for seven years, “to learn the art of
   Painting upon Porcelain ware,” and on the 25th of February
   in the following year (1771) he was transferred, by fresh
   indenture, to Mr. Duesbury.

   WILLIAM GADSBY, of Little Chester, mould maker, bound himself
   by agreement, dated September 2, 1772, for four years (“in the
   Art of Making Molds”), at ten shillings per week; Mr. Duesbury,
   in addition, agreeing “to give William Gadsby a Waggon Load of
   Coals at the end of every year.”

   WILLIAM HALL, a flower-painter.

   JOHN HANCOCK, son of George Hancock, of Derby, was bound
   apprentice for seven years, on the 29th of September, 1769,
   “to learn the Art of Painting upon China or Porcelain or China
   Ware;” to receive 1_s._ 6_d._ a week for the first year, 2_s._
   for the second, 2_s._ 6_d._ for the third, 3_s._ for the fourth,
   4_s._ for the fifth, 5_s._ for the sixth, and 6_s._ for the
   seventh year. He became a very clever and successful flower
   painter. From Derby he is said to have gone to Swansea for
   a time, and from thence to have removed into Staffordshire.
   In 1786–7, he was settled at Hanley, where he seems to have
   remained many years, and occasionally supplied Mr. Duesbury
   with enamel colours. He had a brother (probably George Hancock)
   working for Mr. Duesbury in 1790. To him is due the invention
   of gold, silver, and steel lustre, which, according to his own
   account, written when at the age of 89, he first put in practice
   at Spode’s manufactory. After working at many places--Spode’s,
   Turner’s, and others--Hancock, about 1816, was engaged by
   Messrs. Wedgwood as colour-maker and manager of one of the
   departments of their works. He died in 1847, in the 90th year
   of his age. Some receipts of his and of Aaron Hancock are given
   in Shaw’s Chemistry. His five sons were all brought up to their
   father’s business.

   J. HANCOCK, jun. There appears to have been a second J. Hancock,
   who was an apprentice and who absconded. He is described as “5
   ft. 5½ inches high; dark brown long hair; between 18 and 19
   years of age; had on a dark blue coat with yellow metal buttons
   (rather too short for him), velvet breeches, and either a
   striped velvet waistcoat, or red and white washing waistcoat.”

   GEORGE HANCOCK, second son of John Hancock, removed to Derby
   in 1819, and became a painter at the Derby works; and in 1820
   his elder brother, John, also was there engaged as a colour
   maker and painter. He died in 1840. George Hancock is said for
   a time to have been employed by Billingsley at Pinxton and at
   Mansfield. In 1835 he removed to Burton-on-Trent, having been
   engaged by Mr. Edwards for those works. After many changes he
   died in 1850. These two were uncles of Mr. Sampson Hancock, the
   proprietor of the present Derby China works, whose father was
   James Hancock. William Hancock, a son of the younger John, was
   one of the last apprentices at the Derby works, and is now one
   of the most successful designers in the potteries.

   WILLIAM HAND, a handler and presser.

   FRANCOIS HARDENBURG (lodged with a Mrs. Johnson), as he spelled
   it himself, or Heartenburg, as it was spelled by Mr. Duesbury,
   was a modeller in Derby in 1788 and 1789; having previously been
   employed at Caughley. On the 8th of December in the latter year,
   he was dismissed through repeated “idleness and ignorance.”
   “Brosley, February 16th, 1789. Hon^d Sir, I take the Libberty of
   wrightng to you not knowing aney other Name to truble in what
   I ham going to aske I am a pirson in bunisness was a frend and
   trusted Frances Hartinbirg. When at Mr. Turners Manufactory it
   was not in His power to pay me before he Left, but Promised to
   returne some as soon as he got worke as it is more than I Can
   afford to loose Shall Esteeme it as a great favor if you will be
   so good as to give leafe for one of your Servants to answer this
   to let me know if he is there or not as he is not so gratfull to
   answer aney letter That is sent to him. And ham Sir your Most
   Obed. and Humbe. Sarvt., ANN OAKES. P.S. plest to Direct for Me
   at the Tirkes armes, near Jacfield in Brosley, Shropshire.” He
   afterwards resided in London.

   JOHN HASLEM, a very late painter of flowers, figures, and
   animals.

   JOHN HENSON, one of the last apprentices, became a partner with
   Mr. Hancock, in the present works in King Street; he died in
   1873.

   HICKEY,--“A Mons^r Mons^r Hickey, pres l’Hotel d’Angleterre a
   Bruxelles,”--entered into negotiations with Mr. Duesbury in
   1792; the correspondence having gone on since 1789. He was “a
   native of Ireland,” “a man of reputation,” and a clever painter,
   and “the first china burner in the world, who understands the
   whole from the beginning to the end; if he (Mr. Duesbury) would
   establish a Saxon manufactory,” &c.

   HILL, a native of Warwickshire (commonly known by the
   soubriquets of “Jockey Hill,” and “The Flying Painter,” through
   his partiality for horses and horse-racing), a landscape and
   flower painter of considerable note. After leaving Derby he
   settled in London as a buyer and seller of old Government
   stores, and died there about 1827.

   JAMES HILL, one of the latest apprentices, became a clever
   flower-painter. At the close of the works he became one of the
   partners at the King Street works, and died in 1854.

   HOLLAND, a flower painter.

   WILLIAM HOLMES, a modeller of small animals.

   WILLIAM HORSLEY, kiln man or labourer, and private
   timekeeper, 1794.

    DAVID KEEN,       }
    JOSEPH HALL,      }  “Fire-men,” all bound themselves by agreement
    JACOB SPOONER,    }  for three years each, on the 2nd September,
    ROBERT WOODWARD,  }  1772, to employ “themselves in glazing and
    THOMAS WARDLE,    }  burning of Porcelain, or in such other branch
    SAMUEL WEAVER,    }  of the business” as Mr. Duesbury might think
    WILLIAM WHITEHALL,}  proper to employ them in, at six shillings
    JOHN BUTLER,      }  per week each.
    WILLAM YATES,     }

   SAMUEL KEY, son of Thomas Key, of Derby, who let out horses for
   hire, was, in 1785, apprenticed to Mr. Duesbury, and died in
   1850, in his 80th year. He was a painter of considerable skill,
   especially in the fashionable Dresden style. After leaving
   Derby, he worked for Minton’s at Stoke-upon-Trent. He drew up
   a MS. account of the old Derby China Works, from memory, in
   1837, of which he seems to have made two or three copies; one
   of these is in my own possession. Three of his sons, John, a
   flower-painter; Edward, a modeller; and Samuel, also a modeller;
   were apprenticed at the works. The latter became a famous
   modeller, and his statuettes of theatrical celebrities and
   others were of a high order and became popular. He removed into
   Staffordshire.

   JOHN KEY, son of Samuel Key, also an apprentice, was a clever
   painter of flowers, and afterwards a teacher of drawing, but
   died young. His brother Samuel is a clever modeller.

   JOSEPH LAKIN was employed in 1789.

   JOHN LAWRENCE, “repairer,” was one of the earlier hands, and
   in 1772 he, along with Robert Askew the younger, absconded
   while under articles of agreement, and was advertised in the
   Birmingham papers. On April 11, 1790, he wrote, “I now am in
   employ for Mr. Turner, the Salop china manufactory.” This was
   after he left Derby. In July of the same year, dating from
   “Broasley, July 12, 1790,” he desires letters to be addressed to
   him “at the China Works, near Bridgnorth, Shropshire.”

   STEPHEN LAWRENCE was a clever moulder of ornamental ware.

   CUTHBERT LAWTON, or LOWTON, was a painter of figures and general
   subjects, including hunting scenes, which are said to have been
   his forte.

   LEONARD LEAD, of Belper, “wood collier,” executed articles of
   agreement on the 20th May, 1790, by which he bound himself to
   “burn, manufacture, and convert into charcoal in a good and
   workmanlike manner, all the cord wood which he the said William
   Duesbury shall have occasion to have converted into charcoal;”
   not to work for any one else when he has any in hand for him;
   and to be paid 7_d._ a quarter for every quarter of charcoal so
   made. In this he continued till 1795, when Mr. Duesbury finally
   gave up the use of charcoal. In a letter of Lead’s he says that
   “for generations back, both of father’s side and mother’s, have
   followed the above-mentioned business” of “coaling and cording
   line”--_i.e._, charcoal burning. A son of his, of the same name,
   was, I believe, apprenticed at the works as a flower-painter.

   WILLIAM LONGDON, sen., was a china painter of considerable note
   at the Derby Works.

   WILLIAM LONGDON, jun., son of William Longdon, sen., china
   painter, became an apprentice to Mr. Duesbury, July 5th, 1790,
   “for painting or embellishing porcelain or earthenware.” In an
   order in bastardy in 1799, he is described as a “china-painter.”

   JOHN LOVEGROVE (the same as named on page 58 in my notice of the
   Cock-pit Hill Works), EDMUND HOPKINSON, and JOSEPH KIRKLAND,
   gilders.

   WILLIAM LOVEGROVE entered into an agreement to work for Duesbury.

   DANIEL LUCAS, a landscape and general painter, died in 1867. His
   sons, John, William, and Daniel, were all apprenticed at the
   Derby works.

   MACLACHLAN, a painter of landscapes.

   THOMAS MASON, of Derby, “China or Porcelain repairer,” bound
   himself by an agreement, dated September 2, 1772, for four years
   to Mr. Duesbury, at one guinea per week; Mr. Duesbury, by an
   additional clause, promising “to make Thomas Mason a present
   of five guineas at the end of each year over and above what is
   specified in the articles (according to his service).” Later on
   a Thomas Mason was a timekeeper.

   M. MASON was an apprentice to Mr. Duesbury as a painter. He left
   Derby and engaged himself to Mr. Barr of Worcester, in October,
   1792.

   GEORGE MELLOR, whose forte was painting flowers and insects, was
   an apprentice but left and went to Pinxton. After that he was
   employed at Coalport, and then in Staffordshire, but returned to
   the Derby works. He died in 1861. His son, George Mellor (now
   of London), was also a painter and gilder, as likewise was his
   daughter Sarah.

   WILLIAM MOORE, EDWARD BELFIELD, JOHN MORLEDGE, THOMAS TRUNDELL,
   and JOSEPH SHIPLEY, were throwers in 1774–6.

   JOHN MORLIDGE, son of William Morlidge, of Derby, hatter, was
   apprenticed for seven years, on the 21st August, 1777, “to learn
   the Art of Repairing of China or Porcelain Ware.”

   MULLINS, a figure and landscape painter, was engaged for one
   year certain to come down from London in 1795, to paint in
   enamel on porcelain by the piece, at a fixed scale of charges,
   on which for the first month he was to have 20 per cent., and
   the second month 10 per cent. additional. The prices, in the
   original list in my possession, are very curious.

   JOHN MUSGROVE, kiln man and labourer about 1796.

   WILLIAM PEGG, a Quaker, was a remarkable man in more ways than
   one. He was a tolerably clever painter, but of a very erratic
   and changeable character, and a religious enthusiast; indeed,
   judging from his writings, there can be but little doubt that
   he was not in all things perfectly sane. He wrote a singular
   account of himself, “Traits in the singular life of that
   persecuted man, for his obedience to the Truth, W_{m} Pegg, who
   joined the Society of the People called Quakers in the year
   1800,” in which he traced his descent from Abraham, “who is
   said to be the Father of the Faithful,” because his family were
   of the seed of Esau, red; and that on his mother’s side he was
   descended from Ishmael, because she (his mother) and “all her
   kin are swarthy and marked with a brown freckle.” William Pegg
   was the son of Thomas Pegg, of Etwall, near Derby, who was a
   gardener at Etwall Hall, and a member of the parish choir, where
   he played the hautboy; from here he removed to Whitmore, in
   the Staffordshire pottery district. William Pegg was born in
   1775, and two years afterwards his father removed to Shelton,
   where, at the age of ten, William Pegg was sent to work at a
   pottery. At fourteen he was put to learn the painting on china
   and earthenware, and when of age removed to Derby, and engaged
   himself at the china works till he was twenty-three, when he
   gave it up, and took to the stocking frame, at which he worked
   at one place or other for twelve years. He then, in 1812,
   returned to his old occupation, “making drawings and pictures
   and painting china,” till 1820, when he again gave it up, and
   commenced a small shop. He married Anne Hendley of Derby in
   1814, and died in 1851. Pegg was a clever painter of flowers,
   and his productions had the merit of being, in almost every
   instance, painted from nature.

   THOMAS PEGG, a brother of William Pegg, was one of the gilders
   for many years.

   WILLIAM PEGG, of a different family, was an apprentice at the
   works in the beginning at the present century, but left, and
   became a clever designer for calico printers.

   ROBERT PENNINGTON, painter, 1775.

   EDWARD PHILLIPS, of Derby, “China or Porcelain Painter,” by
   agreement entered into September 2, 1772, bound himself as a
   china painter, at twenty-five shillings per week. He afterwards,
   I believe, removed into Staffordshire, where he carried on
   business on his own account.

   JOHN PORTER, son of Elizabeth Porter, of Spoondon, widow, was
   apprenticed for seven years, on the 7th of April, 1777, “to
   learn the Art of Painting upon China or Porcelain Ware.”

   HENRY L. PRATT, a landscape painter, was apprenticed at the
   Derby works, and afterwards, employed in Staffordshire. He
   became a clever artist in oil, and died in 1873.

   E. PRINCE, a landscape painter.

   RICHARD ROBERTS, one of the Chelsea workmen, under Duesbury at
   Chelsea, was a soldier and pensioner at Chelsea Hospital, and
   was allowed occasional furlough to paint at Derby. Mr. Duesbury
   endeavoured to procure his discharge, so that he might remain
   with him. Here is one of the orders regarding him: “By Order of
   Sir George Howard, K.B., General of His Majesty’s Forces, and
   Governor of the Royal Hospital at Chelsea. Permit the Bearer,
   Richard Roberts, a pensioner in the above-said Hospital to pass
   from hence to Darby in Darbyshire, for the space of Two Months
   from the Date hereof, and then to return to the above-said
   Hospital. He behaving as becomeith. Given under my hand this
   first Day of Dec^r. 1781.                   “L. GRANT, Adj^t.”

   GEORGE ROBERTSON, a landscape painter, died in 1835.

   ROBINSON, a landscape painter.

   JOHN ROCKLEY, labourer; agreement for three years, from 1795 and
   forward, at 9_s._ per week to be employed in the kilns, or in
   any other manner.

   THOMAS RODGERS was employed, at all events, from 1778 in which
   year his wages were raised a shilling per week. He received this
   addition for three years (£7 16s.) in January, 1782, after that,
   till 1793, he received an addition of 3s. a week.

   THOMAS ROGERS, timekeeper and labourer, 1780–95.

   JONATHAN ROSE, a painter, came from London to Derby in 1780, and
   was employed some time.

   JAMES ROWSE, a late flower-painter. Now employed at the King
   Street Works.

   SARTINE was a modeller in London, employed by Duesbury in 1790,
   on the recommendation of Vulliamy, to model figures.

   CHARLES SHEEN, a clever thrower and presser, formerly of
   Worcester, and in 1791, at the New Hall works at Shelton, was
   engaged for Derby.

   THOMAS SIMES (or SIMS) was an apprentice, from the age of 11 to
   21, to Mr. Duesbury; in 1792 he absconded, and a warrant was
   issued for his apprehension, and endorsed for the county of
   Stafford.

   MUNDY SIMPSON, a gilder and general painter.

   WILLIAM SLATER, born at South Normanton, was an apprentice at
   the Pinxton works, but came to Derby in 1813. He was a good
   general painter. He died in Staffordshire in 1867. Two of
   his sons, William and Joseph, were apprenticed at the Derby
   works. They and their sons rank among the best painters in the
   Staffordshire potteries.

   CONSTANTINE SMITH, of Derby, in the county of Derby, preparer of
   colours and porcelain painter and enameller, was one of the best
   “hands” at the Derby works. On the 28th of October, 1773, his
   son William Smith was bound apprentice to him.

   WILLIAM SMITH, who had on the 28th October, 1773, been bound
   apprentice to his father, Constantine Smith, to learn “the art
   of preparing colours, and Painting and Enameling Porcelain,”
   agreed with Mr. Duesbury, to whom he had “finished his time,”
   and been since employed, in 1790, to employ himself “in
   preparing enamel colours, painting china, or otherwise at
   the discretion of Mr. Duesbury.” Up to this time he had been
   receiving a guinea a week, but on the signing of this fresh
   agreement Duesbury was to pay him £10 down, and to raise his
   wages to 25_s._

   JOSEPH SMITH was a landscape painter; he had 7_s._ a dozen for
   painting teas No. 115 in 1792.

   WILLIAM SMITH, son of Hannah Smith, of Derby, agreed “to make
   colours for painting on china or porcelain ware,” and by
   covenant entered into on the 23rd of November, 1778, agreed
   as follows:--“I do hereby promise to pay to my mother, Hannah
   Smith, weekly, and every week, out of the wages I may get under
   Mess^{rs} Duesbury & Co., the sum of eighteen shillings, to
   commence from this date and expire the 28th October, 1780.
   Witness my hand, this 23_{d} Nov^r 1778.--W. SMITH.”

   THOMAS SOARE was an apprentice to Duesbury, and afterwards
   employed by him. He was son of ---- Soare, of Little Chester,
   and was a clever gilder and arabesque painter. After leaving
   the China Works, Thomas Soare commenced, in 1810, a small
   business on his own account. The following is his advertisement,
   copied from the “Derby Mercury” of April 5th, 1810:--“Enamelled
   China.--Thomas Soare, with the greatest respect, begs to inform
   the Nobility, Gentry, and Public at large that he enamels
   Dessert, Breakfast, and Tea Services with Arms, Crests, Cyphers,
   &c., in the most elegant manner and on the most reasonable
   terms. His long experience in the Derby Porcelain Manufactory
   encourages him to look with confidence for support, which it
   will be his study to deserve and his pride to acknowledge.
   N.B.--Ladies instructed to Paint china at their own apartments,
   on reasonable terms. Navigation Row, near St. Mary’s Bridge,
   Derby.”

   THOMAS SOUTHALL, “son of Humphrey Southall, of the Borough
   of Derby, Pincher,” was apprenticed on the 25th of December
   (Christmas Day) 1772, for seven years “to learn the Art of
   Painting upon China or Porcelain Ware.”

   J. STABLES, a clever gilder, was employed for very many years.

   JOHN STANESBY, a flower painter in the latter days of the works.

   THOMAS STEELE, one of the later and more celebrated painters of
   flowers and fruit, in the latter of which he excelled. He died
   in 1850, in his 79th year. Three of his sons, Edwin, Horatio,
   and Thomas, were apprenticed at the works.

   MARTIN STEPHENS, then of Duke Street, St. James’s, London,
   signed articles of agreement in 1794.

   FRANCIS STONE, a skilled workman, was employed at all events
   from 1770 to 1772, and probably much longer.

   JOSEPH and THOMAS TATLOW were late apprentices and became clever
   painters.

   TAYLOR, at first a blue painter, afterwards became a clever
   arabesque and Indian pattern painter. He painted the centres of
   a service of plates for Mr. Digby in 1784.

   JAMES TURNER, a late flower-painter.

   S. or J. VIDAL, a painter, who, in August, 1793 till May,
   1795, was living at “No. 1, Grosvenor Row, near the Bun-house,
   Chelsea,” arranged, in the latter year, to leave London for
   Derby “for six months every year, from June to January.” In
   1793, he had sent specimens of his flower-painting to Mr.
   Duesbury, and in doing so said, “As I have not painted anything
   on china in this country, I am for that reason induced to show
   what I am capable of doing in that line, being perfectly master
   of the employment and direction of employing the colors, having
   painted for about eleven years in the Porcelaine line,” &c.

   JOHN WARDLE, “china painter” in 1800 (so described in an
   affiliation order).

   WATHEWS, a thrower and presser, was employed in 1787–90.

   WILLIAM WATSON, a general painter.

   H. WEBBER, a noted modeller, was employed in London by Mr.
   Duesbury, and afterwards, in 1795, removed to Derby; the terms
   of his engagement being shown in a letter from which the
   following is an extract:--“London, Wed_{y}, July 15, 95.

                             { N^o 4, Lisson Grove,
                             {     near Lisson Green.

   “DEAR SIR,--When I had the pleasure of seeing you in Town, I
   understood (or rather misunderstood) you was about to depart
   for the Lakes; not for Derby: Therefore I had no intention
   of writing to you ’till I shou’d have heard of your return
   home;--But a call from M_{r} Lygo has set me right on that
   head, and I lose no time to perform my promise; which I think
   was, that as soon as I cou’d make up my mind on the matters
   spoken of, to communicate it to you. Permit me then Sir briefly
   to say, that the terms you propose--namely £100 pr. An^m. I
   accept; with the allowance of a months vacation in the year
   without deduction. But I find many obstacles arise which I am
   sorry for--the detail of which I will not trouble you with;
   but only beg leave to point out one of them,--which is--how to
   get a tenant for the house I live in, and what relates to it.
   However, I have requested the favor of M^r. Lygo to speak of
   it to any friend he may suppose wou’d wish such a thing, and
   have also spoken to other acquaintances and friends; and you
   may rest assur’d Sir, that as soon as I can get rid of this
   Stumbling-block (_which is indeed the principal_), I shall not
   fail to use the utmost diligence in doing away every other in
   hope to realize the pleasure I anticipate of paying my respects
   to you at Derby. I am Sir, with Deference and Regard, Your Most
   obed^t and very Humble Servant, H. WEBBER.”

   MOSES WEBSTER, a flower-painter, was an apprentice, and
   afterwards employed at the works. He was afterwards a teacher of
   drawing, and died in 1870.

   JOHN WELLS, a labourer, to be employed in any part of the
   manufacture of china; fresh articles of agreement dated 1794.

   WILLIAM WHEELDON (whose mother was a sister of the wife of
   William Billingsley), was a clever flower painter.

   JOHN WHITAKER, one of the workmen, in partnership with Mr.
   Cocker, began in February, 1826, a china manufactory in
   Friargate, Derby, but he failed in the same year. His son,
   John Whitaker, began to work at the Derby China Works in 1818,
   when only eleven years old, and in 1821 (Feb. 23rd) was bound
   apprentice to Mr. Blore. In 1831 he became overlooker, and so
   continued until the close of the works. Later on he was employed
   at Minton’s and other places. He died in 1874.

   RICHARD WHITAKER, a thrower and presser, employed in the
   ornamental department, in which he was very clever, from about
   1769 till 1786, when he died.

   WILLIAM WINGFIELD, apprenticed at the works, was a clever
   modeller, but died young.

   JOHN WINROW, son of John Winrow, of Duffield, Innholder, was
   apprenticed, by the same printed indentures, for seven years, on
   the 6th of June, 1766, “to learn the Art of Painting on China or
   Porcelain ware.”

   EDWARD WITHERS, “of London, porcelain or china painter,” entered
   into an agreement with Mr. Duesbury, on the 8th of May, 1789,
   engaging himself for three years from the 27th of September
   in that year “as a painter on porcelain” at the rate of 3_s._
   6_d._ per day. It is said that he had previously been employed
   at Derby, and from thence removed into Staffordshire, where he
   worked as a china painter; then to Birmingham, where he worked
   as a painter of japanned tea-trays. He is stated to have died in
   Bridge Gate, Derby. A William Withers, potter, residing in 1778
   at Rotherham, was in that year a voter at Derby.

   WILLIAM YATES, a gilder.

   JOHN YATES, general and flower painter and gilder, apprenticed
   to, and afterwards employed by Duesbury about 1772. He is said
   to have excelled in hunting subjects and flowers.

In 1876, while this chapter is passing through the press, new China
Works, on a large scale, are about to be established on the Osmaston
Road, Derby, by Mr. Edward Phillips, one of the proprietors of the
Royal Porcelain Works at Worcester; there is therefore at last the
pleasant prospect of one of the old staple trades of the town, that of
porcelain, being brought back in all its integrity, and carried on with
vigour and enlightenment.




                              CHAPTER IV.


   Chesterfield--Caskon--Heathcote--Brampton--Posset Pots--Puzzle
   Jugs--Welshpool and Payne Potteries--The Pottery--Walton
   Pottery--Wheatbridge Pottery--Alma, Barker, and London
   Potteries--Whittington--Bromley--Jewitt--Newbold--Eckington--Belper
   --Codnor Park--Denby--Bournes Pottery--Shipley--Alfreton--Langley
   Mills--Ilkeston--Pinxton--Pinxton China--China
   Tokens--Wirksworth--Dale Abbey--Repton--Encaustic
   Tiles--Tile Kilns, London--Tickenhall--Kings
   Newton--Burton-on-Trent--Swadlincote Potteries--Church Gresley
   Potteries--Gresley Common--Woodville--Hartshorne, &c.--Wooden
   Box--Rawdon Works--Pool Works--Coleorton--&c., &c.


                             CHESTERFIELD.

The earliest potter in Chesterfield of whom there is any record is
William Caskon, or Kaskon, who died 8th Henry VIII. (1517), and
the next is Ralph Heathcote, who was both a potter, brazier, and
bell-founder. This Ralph Heathcote, who had married Elizabeth, daughter
of John Tomson (or Tomason, as it is variously spelled), brazier, of
Chesterfield, became by will of his father-in-law (will dated October
1, 1496) executor. Tomson lived in Saltergate, in a house previously
held by William Forneday and Margaret his wife, which was surrendered
to him in 1483. This house was afterwards, in 1501, released to
“Ralph Heathcote, of Chesterfield, Potter.” This is evidenced by two
deeds, one by Thomas Moore, of Cuttethorpe, releasing the messuage in
Saltergate to “Ralph Hethcote, of Chesterfield, Potter”; and the other
from Thomas Moore, of Cuttethorp, and James Moore, of Syrley Grange,
“to Ralph Hethecote, of Chesterfield, Potter,” a bond for £20 to secure
peaceable possession of the messuage in the Saltergate, Chesterfield,
late in the occupation of John Tomson, deceased, and W. Forneby,
deceased.”

It is evident, from a deed of 8th Henry VIII. (1517), that Ralph
Heathcote took to the trade and goods of William Caskon, potter,
of Chesterfield, in that year. The deed is a receipt from “Isabel
Kaskon, ye daughter of William Caskon, of Chesterfield, Potter, lately
deceased,” to “Rauff Hethcote, of ye same place, brasier, for her
child’s part of the goodes and money of the said William Caskon.”

In 1557–8 Robert Parker, of Chesterfield, gent., and Mary, his wife,
son and heir of George Parker, deceased, of the one part, and Rauf
Heathcott, of Chesterfield, potter, of the other part, released a
tenement in Saltergate, and lands at Tapton Lane.

The manufacture of pottery continued uninterruptedly from Heathcote’s
time downwards, although the names of the potters are not always to be
found. In a scarce little book, entitled “A Short Tour in the Midland
Counties of England performed in the Summer of 1772,” the following
interesting notice of Chesterfield occurs:--

   “Chesterfield is a large town; but, as I passed through, I saw
   nothing uncommon but the ugly church; it is old and built of
   bad stone, but rendered most disgusting by its wooden spire
   (covered with lead) being so much warped that I discovered
   its crookedness at three miles distance. In the town is
   a manufacture of pots. At Asher and many villages in the
   neighbourhood camomile is much cultivated.”

Pilkington, who wrote in 1789, says, speaking of the manufactures of
Chesterfield:--

   “Nor should it be omitted, that a large quantity of coarse
   earthenware is manufactured here. In this business three
   potteries are worked, which afford employment to about sixty
   hands.”

Sir Richard Phillips, who wrote his “Tour” in 1828, says, speaking of
Chesterfield:--

   “There are some potteries in this neighbourhood which employ
   about 200 persons, at wages of from 10s. to 13s. per week,
   and for better workmen, from 18s. to 25s. The description of
   manufacture is exclusively brown ware, except in one instance,
   which includes black also. The number of potteries is ten,
   and the larger part is for home consumption, though a small
   proportion is sent to the Dutch market.”


                               BRAMPTON.

The manufacture of brown ware at Brampton has probably been established
a couple of centuries. In the early part of the present century there
were here six earthenware manufactories, which were carried on by the
following persons:--Mrs. Blake (this now forms part of the works of
Mr. Matthew Knowles); Mr. William Briddon (now continued by his son);
Mr. Luke Knowles (now forming part of Mr. Matthew Knowles’ works);
Mr. Thomas Oldfield (now continued by his nephew, Mr. John Oldfield);
Mr. John Wright (now discontinued; it stood on what is now the site
of the present rectory of St. Thomas’s Church); and that of Edward
Wright and Son (still carried on by the family). At the present time
there are eight manufactories, which will be separately spoken of
presently. At these, brown ware of a remarkably hard and durable
quality, and stoneware of the most impervious character, are made in
great perfection and in immense quantities. The clays principally used
are “Stone Edge,” or “Lidd clay,” found at East Moor, or Wadshelf,
about three miles away, and “Brampton clay,” found in the immediate
neighbourhood.

  [Illustration: Figs. 95 and 96.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 97 and 98.]

At Brampton, “posset pots” have, for some centuries, been, and still
continue to be, made. Of these some notice is already given in vol. i.,
pp. 107, 108, and 418. The two here engraved (Figs. 95 and 96) show
their general form; the one is dated 1750 and the other 1819. I have
myself examples as late as 1874. Usually the name of the parties for
whom they are made are incised in same manner as the pattern.

Another marked feature of Brampton, or “Chesterfield Ware,” has for a
long period been the “puzzle jugs” there made. These, which are still
produced on the old models, as well as in more modern applications of
the principle, are made in a variety of shapes and of various sizes.
In some the perforations in the neck and rim are more elaborate and
intricate than in others, and some have three, five, or seven spouts.
Commonly, as in Fig. 97, they are ornamented with figures or other
designs in relief, but sometimes are plain.

Another usual class of design is that which includes jugs, mugs, and
other vessels whose handles (Fig. 98) are formed of more or less
cleverly modelled greyhounds. Some of the larger of these mugs have
two, others three, and others four, handles thus formed.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Welshpool and Payne Potteries._--These works, belonging to
Messrs. Matthew Knowles and Son, are among the largest in Brampton.
They embrace the old works carried on last century by Mr. Blake,
and afterwards by his widow, and those of Mr. Luke Knowles, with
considerable additions. They came into the hands of Mr. Matthew Knowles
about 1840, and were by him considerably enlarged. Recently he has
been joined in partnership by his son, under the style of “Matthew
Knowles & Son,” and the works were again in 1875 very much extended.
At these works all the general descriptions of brown and stone ware
goods are produced; but an immense number of articles are made for
the Australian, Russian, African, and Jamaica markets, as well as for
the home trade. Among the articles produced in large quantities at
these works are stoneware spirit-bottles, and spirit kegs and barrels,
which are much esteemed for their hardness and durability and their
fine quality; ginger-beer bottles, both in stone ware and brown ware;
jam jars, for wholesale preserve manufacturers (such as Grey, Dennett
& Co., and others), in gallon and half-gallon sizes, in brown ware
glazed inside, forming one of the staple productions of Mr. Knowles,
and of which, with one exception, he is the only maker in the district;
stew and sauce pots; fruit and other jars; flat dishes; turtle and beef
pots; bowls and collanders; tobacco-jars, highly ornamented; “Punch”
jugs of striking design, “hunting” jugs, “game” jugs, and other jugs
designed and modelled with great taste; puzzle-jugs; posset-pots;
candlesticks of classical design and good execution; bread-baskets;
toast-racks; tea-kettles; flower-pots and vases; foot and carriage
warmers; grotesque tobacco-pipes, and a large variety of other goods,
besides the usual domestic vessels, are made at these works, and are as
good as the common nature of the material will admit. The filters made
by Mr. Knowles, of which he produces a large number, are of excellent
construction, and of good design. They are among the best produced, and
being in the fine deep rich colour of the “Chesterfield ware,” are very
effective, and perhaps more pleasing in appearance than many others
in the “Bristol ware,” &c. In china clay ware also a large variety of
articles of remarkably good quality are made. It may be well to add
that at these works the clay is prepared by steam. It is “blunged,” and
then passed through a fine sieve, driven at considerable speed on a
large flat iron boiler, heated by steam, where it is boiled to a proper
stiffness. It is then passed through a pug-mill, and is ready for use.
Mr. Knowles’s are the only works in Brampton where this process is
adopted.

       *       *       *       *       *

“_The Pottery._”--These works were established, in 1810, by “Messrs.
Oldfield, Madin, Wright, Hewitt & Co.,” by whom they were carried on.
After various changes and retirements, Mr. John Oldfield became, in
1838, sole proprietor of the works, and under his name they continue at
the present time. The works have from time to time been considerably
extended; they are now nearly the largest in the district, and
employ a large number of hands. The goods manufactured are the usual
descriptions known as “New Brampton” or “Chesterfield ware,” or,
as more frequently falsely called in the London and other markets,
“Nottingham ware,”--a remarkably hard, compact, and durable salt-glazed
brown ware; and stoneware, which is dipped in different “slips.” In
“brown ware,” the principal goods produced are dishes and bowls of
various kinds; turtle, beef, butter, Dutch, stew, sauce, and other
pots; bottles and jars of all shapes and sizes, and for all uses;
pitchers and jugs in endless variety; churns: milk-pans and pancheons;
nappies and porringers; tea and coffee-pots; Welsh trays; carriage
and feet-warmers; hare-pans and dog-troughs; spirit and wine-barrels
and kegs; figured flower-pots and stands; scent jars; “hunting,”
“cottage,” “tulip,” and other figured jugs and mugs; moulds for
puddings, blanc-mange, jellies, &c., of great beauty and of excellent
and even artistic design, and many other articles. In “antique ware,”
Mr. Oldfield makes remarkably effective and well-designed hunting,
game, cottage, tulip, and other jugs; figured Stilton-cheese stands;
fruit-dishes and trays; tea and coffee-pots; tobacco-pots, some of
which, with goblet and candlestick, are very striking; watch-stands;
“Toby Fill-pot” jugs; small figures of stags, dogs, &c.; grotesque and
twisted pipes; puzzle-jugs, &c. In stoneware many articles are also
produced, the great bulk being bottles and spirit kegs of various kinds
and of every size, from one pint up to ten or more gallons in capacity;
and sanitary goods.

Filters also form a staple branch of the manufacture, and these are
filted up on an exceedingly good principle, with vegetable charcoal,
sand, &c., on the premises, and are supplied in large quantities both
at home and for exportation. The manufacture of filters was here
commenced in 1826.

The clays used and the processes observed in the manufacture may be
briefly alluded to as follows:--

   Five kinds of clay are here used, viz., _Barclay_, which is
   procured from Stanedge, near Wingerworth. This clay is used to
   make the arches which are technically called “Bars,” and two of
   them form nearly a semicircle that spans from side to side of
   the ovens and whereon the pots are placed. _Setting-clay_ is
   a clay that is found on the peat-moss, near Stanedge, and is
   quite of a sandy nature: it acquires the name from its being
   rolled by the hands into “nobs” and placed upon the “Bars” to
   “set” the pots upon; unless this was used, the pots would have
   to be broken to get them off the “Bars.” The _Lidd-clay_ (what
   is commonly called Fire-clay) is used in the lower parts of the
   “Ovens” or “Kilns,” because of its being stronger to resist the
   fire; this clay is procured from Loads, near Holymoorside, about
   two miles from Brampton. The next clay is the _Brampton-clay_
   which is burnt in the upper portion of the “Ovens,” because
   it will not stand the amount of fire that the Lidd-clay will,
   although it is of a much closer body, and, when glazed, will
   resist the action of any acids. _Mixed-clay_ is burnt in the
   middle portion of the “Ovens;” it is, as its name implies, a
   mixture of the Brampton and Lidd-clay, of each about equal
   portions to suit the fire or heat in that portion of the ovens.

At these works spirit bottles of a similar character to the one
engraved on Fig. 105 were made. One was a representation of Lord
Brougham, with the words, “The true Spirit of Reform.”

Among the marks used by this firm are--

        ESTABLISHED
           1826
     J. OLDFIELD & CO.
       CHESTERFIELD
       WATER FILTER
       MANUFACTURERS,
    WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
         AND FOR
       EXPORTATION.

    OLDFIELD & CO
       MAKERS

    OLDFIELD & CO.
    CHESTERFIELD.

    J. OLDFIELD.

  [Illustration: Figs. 99 to 102.]

The _Walton Pottery_ was built by William Briddon, the grandfather
of the present proprietor, in 1790, and at his death was continued
by his son, William Briddon. This gentleman died in 1848, and was
succeeded by his son, William Briddon, the present proprietor. It has
consequently, from the first to the present moment, been carried on
by three generations of William Briddons. The goods made are brown
ware and stoneware in all their varieties. In these are produced stew,
souse, turtle, beef, and butter pots; jugs of every variety; preserve
and pickle jars; pancheons, bowls, and cullenders; porringers and
patty-pans; bottles of every conceivable size and shape; filters;
spirit-barrels and kegs; foot-bottles and carriage-warmers; tea and
coffee-pots; twisted and grotesque pipes, and many other articles. In
quality they are much the same as those of other Brampton manufactories.

_Wheatbridge Pottery._--These works have been in the family of their
present proprietor for three generations. They are now carried on by
Mrs. J. Walton Wright, the widow of the late proprietor. The staple
trade of the manufactory is general brown ware for the Dutch markets.

The _Alma Pottery_ was commenced by its present proprietor, Mr.
Samuel Lowe, and his then partners, about 1852. After a few years Mr.
Lowe’s two partners withdrew from the concern, and it has continued
in his hands solely to the present time. The goods produced are the
same general kinds, both of wares and articles, as the other Brampton
potteries. In brown ware and in stoneware Mr. Lowe produces filters,
bottles of every kind and size, jugs and mugs, jars of various
descriptions, and all the articles usually produced in these wares, and
of the same general quality as those of other works in the district.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Barker Pottery_, belonging to Mr. Henry Briddon. Here all the usual
articles in brown ware are made.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Pottery_ of Mr. William Briddon, Jun., produces the usual kinds of
wares, and most of the articles, of the district.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _London Pottery_, belonging to Messrs. F. Lipscombe & Co., of
London, was established by them for the purpose of manufacturing their
filters.


                             WHITTINGTON.

At Whittington, pot works have existed from an early date, and are
still continued. At these much good ware and many specialities of
design, &c., were produced; it is only necessary to premise that the
goods are commonly known by the general term of “Chesterfield ware”
or “Nottingham ware”--it being a fact that London houses still sell,
and persist in calling, the products of these Derbyshire works by the
latter name.

The Whittington Potteries[32] are of very old establishment, having
been in existence since about the middle or latter end of the
seventeenth century, if not longer. Here the ordinary brown ware
of the period was manufactured; the ware being of extreme hardness
and closeness of texture, and having a rich warm reddish-brown
colour. About the year 1800, and for some years later, the works,
which were near the race-course, were held by Mr. William Bromley,
who, in addition to the ordinary brown ware, made also a white, or
cream-coloured, earthenware of fine quality. In this fine body he
manufactured dinner, tea, and other services, principally decorated,
in the prevailing manner, with transfer-printing in blue. He also
practised batt-printing for some of his goods. Mr. Bromley also made
some experiments in, and succeeded in producing, a very good china
ware, but he did not prosecute this branch of manufacture to any
extent. At that time, when Mr. Bromley was making the fine earthenware,
and was experimenting on porcelain bodies, my late father, Mr. Arthur
Jewitt, then a young man, was residing at Brampton, and was in habits
of close intimacy with him. My father being a man of scientific,
as well as of high literary attainments, and being, moreover, a
good artist, took considerable interest in his friend Mr. Bromley’s
manufacture, and at his own house at Brampton entered with spirit into
a series of experiments in enamelling and enamel-printing, and in
other processes for decorating the wares. For this purpose he caused
to be erected in his own house two enamel kilns, one of which he had
constructed on the ordinary simple principle of heating, and the other
on the spiral principle. He also fitted up, for the purpose of these
private experiments, a small printing-room, and here, being, as I
have said, a good artist, he tried various processes for transferring
aquatints and etchings (which he etched and prepared himself) by the
batt-process, both on to the biscuit and on to the white glazed ware.
By this process he produced many remarkably successful transfers; but,
like the boy who dug up the seeds in his garden day by day, to see if
they were sprouting, and so killed them, he was always so impatient to
see the result of his experiments that he did not wait for the fire in
the kilns to die out, but opened the doors, and so frequently spoiled
all the pieces. Sufficient, however, remained each time to show that he
was right in his experiments, and that his trials were all that could
be desired.

  [Illustration: Fig. 103.]

Besides transfer-printing, he tried some interesting experiments in
surface-painting on the biscuit. Only one example of this ware is known
to exist, and this fortunately is now in my own possession. It is here
engraved (Fig. 103). It bears a view of (I believe) Renishaw Hall, and
part of the park, with deer, &c. The body is extremely light, and the
painting highly artistic. It is simply surface-painted on the biscuit.
It is a small flower-pot, or “bow-pot,” and saucer, and is only 3⅜
inches in height.

These experiments are highly interesting in connection with the
Whittington and Brampton potteries. They were very successful, and
showed that had my father devoted his time and his talents to the
process, great results would have been achieved. As it was, he
prosecuted his inquiries as an amateur only, and from a simple love of
the art, and his name, until I made it known in the _Art-Journal_
a few years ago, has never been publicly associated with the fictile
history of the country. I felt that it was due to the memory of one
of the most talented of men, and the best of parents, that I should
place his name on record in connection with an art in which, for a
short time, in midst of a busy literary life,[33] he took such a lively
interest.

Mr. Bromley continued the works for some years, when they changed
hands. He was a man of great ability and of much spirit, and did more
to further the standard of excellence of the works in his district than
any of his contemporaries. He had three sons, Rev. Samuel Bromley,
who was a poet of no ordinary stamp, and was a Baptist missionary to
Jamaica and other countries; Joseph Bromley, who entered the army; and
the Rev. James Bromley, whose name is well known in connection with the
Wesleyan persuasion. The works afterwards belonged to Messrs. Robert
Bainbrigge & Co. The pot-works at Whittington, in the early part of the
present century, were carried on by Mr. William Johnson and Mr. Aaron
Madin. At the present time there are two manufactories at this place;
viz. those of Mr. Samuel Lancaster, successor to Mr. Madin, and Mr.
James Pearson.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Stone Bottle Works._--These works, at Whittington Moor, were
established in 1818 by Mr. Aaron Madin, and they are now carried on in
his name by his son-in-law, Mr. Samuel Lancaster. The goods produced
are in stoneware, brown ware, and coarse black ware. The stoneware
is made of fire-clay, found underneath the Tupton coal-measures at
Brampton and elsewhere, and glazed with the usual compound of flint,
Paris white, Cornwall stone, barytes, and ground glass. It is of good
quality, and very hard and durable. The ground ware is, as is usual in
the district, salt-glazed; and the black ware, which is made of the
common brick-clay, is glazed chiefly with lead-ore. The goods produced
are the usual domestic and other articles made in the neighbourhood,
and their quality is equal to most others.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Whittington Pottery._--At these works, belonging to Mr. James Pearson,
the usual classes of goods, as made at the other potteries of the
district, are produced.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Whittington Moor Pottery._--Mr. S. Lancaster (late A. Madin) has a
manufactory of coarse pancheon ware at this place; the body, as usual,
coarse red outside, and lined with a black glaze inside.


                               NEWBOLD.

There is a manufactory of coarse brown ware--pancheons, bread-pans,
stein-pots, &c.,--carried on by Mr. W. Sharratt at this place. The
productions are of much the same character as those of Whittington
Moor, Tickenhall, &c.


                              ECKINGTON.

Pilkington in 1789 says, “A manufacture of sickles is carried on. There
are also two potteries in the town.”


                                BELPER.

About the middle or towards the latter part of last century, a small
manufactory of common coarse brown ware existed here, and about 1800
Mr. William Bourne took to the works carried on by Messrs. Blood,
Webster, and Simpson, at Belper Pottery. Mr. William Bourne, sen.,
was, it appears, very much engaged in the business of the then new
canal. Letters of his, and of his son, William Bourne, jun., in which
reference is made to his connection with the canal, and show business
transactions between them and Mr. Duesbury of the Derby China Works,
are in my own possession. Mr. Bourne carried on the manufacture of
salt-glazed blacking, ink, ginger-beer, and spirit bottles. The
ordinary brown ware, produced from a less vitreous clay, found on
the spot, consisted of bowls, pans, pancheons, dishes, pitchers, and
all the commoner varieties of domestic vessels, and these were of
excellent and durable quality. The stoneware bottles, &c., were made
from a finer and more tenacious bed of clay, at Denby, a few miles
distant. The finer, or figured wares, were made from clay procured from
Staffordshire. By Mr. Bourne all these descriptions of goods were made,
but he principally confined himself to the manufacture of stoneware
bottles of various kinds. A good antique-shaped hunting jug, and other
similar articles, with figures in relief, was also extensively made.
In 1812, Mr. Joseph Bourne (son of William Bourne) took to the Denby
Pottery (which see) then carried on by Mr. Jäger, and the two works
were carried on simultaneously until 1834, when the Belper Pottery was
finally closed, the workpeople, plant, and business being removed to
Denby, and incorporated with those works, and the premises converted
into cottages. From that time no pottery has been made at Belper. The
site of the works was at Belper-Gutter, and “Pot-House Lane,” the name
of one of the streets, perpetuates the manufacture.

  [Illustration:

    BELPHER & DENBY

    BOURNES
    POTTERIES

    DERBYSHIRE

  Fig. 104.]

  [Illustration:

    WILLIAM, IV,th’s
    REFORM
    CORDIAL.

  Figs. 105 and 106.]

The mark used while these works were carried on in conjunction with
those at Denby was this; and it may be well to remark that a series of
political bottles, bearing representations of various Reform leaders,
were made. On these the head of the individual--the King, Sir Francis
Burdett, Earl Grey, or whomsoever was intended--formed the neck of
the bottle, and the arms and bust the shoulder; political references,
and the name of the political leader, were impressed on the clay. One
of these, which represents the King (William IV.) is engraved on Fig.
105. It bears in front the words “WILLIAM IV.’S REFORM CORDIAL,”--the
“cordial” being the brandy or other spirit it was intended to contain.
Another is a representation, in smaller form, of Lord John Russell
(afterwards Earl Russell); it bears, in front, the name “LORD JOHN
RUSSELL,” and on a scroll which he holds in his hand are inscribed the
words, “THE TRUE SPIRIT OF REFORM.” At the back is the mark Fig. 104.
At these works too, I believe, quaintly designed inkstands, of which
Fig. 106 is an example, were made. The projecting lower jaw formed the
well for the ink, while holes on the shoulders served for places to put
the pens in when not in use. They were made of the ordinary vitrified
stoneware.

In 1827 a coarse-ware pottery was carried on here by Mr. Heapey.


                             CODNOR PARK.

The pottery at Codnor Park was built in the year 1820, by the
world-renowned Butterley Iron Company, the owners of the famed iron
works of Butterley and Codnor Park. At this time the Butterley works
were under the management of the late Mr. William Jessop, son of one
of the partners, and afterwards senior partner of the firm. Some
years before this time the Company had constructed a large cast-iron
bridge for the Nabob of Oude, and on its despatch a brother of Mr.
William Jessop accompanied it to India to superintend its erection,
taking with him several workmen, among whom was an engine-fitter named
William Burton. From some cause or other the bridge was not erected
by the Nabob, and after remaining several years in India, the parties
returned to England. On their return, this William Burton was induced
to commence the pottery, and having engaged a skilled workman from the
Brampton Potteries, near Chesterfield, he commenced operations in 1821.
The pottery was situated near the Codnor Park Iron Works, from which
it took its name, and pretty close to the Butterley Canal, and was
successfully carried on for several years. Sir Richard Phillips, in his
“Tour,” in 1828, thus notes the pottery:--

   “Over near Codnor Castle, I viewed a rough and ill-built
   manufactory, where they turn and bake those opaque bottles used
   for ginger-beer, soda-water, liquid blacking, &c. About 50 women
   and children finish 100 gross per day, and they sell the pints
   at 15_d._ and 16_d._ per doz., and all pints at 2_s._, and
   quarts at 3_s._ 6_d._ They are made of the clay of the vicinity,
   and the agent for selling them is Kemp, in Milk Street, London.
   They are harder and less liable to burst than glass bottles.”

In 1832, Mr. Burton having got into pecuniary difficulties, the works
were closed. After remaining unworked for many months, the concern was,
in 1833, taken by Mr. Joseph Bourne, of the Denby Pottery. They gave
employment to about sixty persons.

The Codnor Park Works were carried on by Mr. Bourne until 1861, when
they were finally closed, and the workmen, plant, &c. were transferred
to the Denby Works, where additional work-rooms had been erected for
their accommodation.

The clay was of a similar kind to that used at Denby, but owing to a
larger impregnation of iron the ware produced therefrom was not equal
in appearance to that made at Denby, though the bottles were highly
vitreous, and had an extensive sale. This clay was obtained at Cupet
Green, in the immediate neighbourhood, and the coal from Birchwood
Colliery. (The hard coal is the only kind adapted for burning in the
salt-glazed kilns.) London was the chief market, the crates being
forwarded by canal.

The classes of goods produced at Codnor Park were all the usual classes
of household vessels, and also stoneware bottles of various kinds, and
of all sizes up to six gallons, and pans, bowls, jugs, pitchers, and
other articles. Besides these, however, a remarkably fine, compact,
light, and delicate buff-coloured terra-cotta was produced. In this
were made butter-coolers, vases of various kinds, flower-baskets and
pots, ewers, spill-cases, and numberless other articles. Many of these
were of excellent design, and beautifully decorated with foliage and
other ornaments in relief. Puzzle-jugs, &c. were also made of this
material, and surface-painted with a peculiar mottled effect. The mark
during Mr. Burton’s time was his name and “Codnor Park,” or simply the
name “Wm. Burton,” impressed on the clay. The manufacture of ordinary
household earthenware was discontinued when Mr. Bourne took to the
concern, his operations being confined to the manufacture of bottles.
For some of this information I am indebted to Mr. Humphrey Goodwin
(through Mr. Bourne of Codnor Park), who was connected with the works
from their opening in 1821 until their close.


                                DENBY.

The “Denby Pottery” is situated in the parish of Denby, seven miles
from Derby and two from Ripley,--a village memorable as being the
birthplace of Flamstead, the astronomer,--in the midst of the rich
ironstone and coal-fields of Derbyshire, the former of which are said
to have been regularly worked from the time of the Romans.[34] The
works were commenced in 1809 by a Mr. Jäger, on the estate of W. Drury
Lowe, Esq., where, some time before, a valuable and extensive bed of
clay had been found to exist. This clay, previous to the establishment
of the Denby Works, was used at the Belper Pottery, for the manufacture
of stoneware ink, blacking, and other bottles. The Denby clay was
also supplied to the Derby China Works, in considerable quantities,
where it was used for saggers, and for a few other articles which were
produced. In 1812, Mr. Joseph Bourne, son of William Bourne, of the
Belper Pottery, succeeded Mr. Jäger, and the Belper and Denby works
were carried on simultaneously until 1834, when the Belper Works
were discontinued, and the plant and workpeople removed to Denby.
The works were at this time much increased, and gradually extended
their operations. In 1833, the Codnor Park Works (which see) passed
into the hands of Mr. Bourne, and were carried on by him, along with
those of Denby, until 1861, when they were closed, and the workpeople,
plant, &c., as in the case of the Belper Works, removed to Denby.
Considerable additions were made for this increase of workpeople, and
the manufactory was much extended. In 1845, Mr. Bourne also became
possessed of the Shipley Pottery (which see), and in 1856 removed those
works to Denby. With the Denby Pottery are therefore incorporated those
of Belper, Codnor Park, and Shipley.

Mr. Joseph Bourne having taken his son, Joseph Harvey Bourne, into
partnership, the business was carried on under the style of Joseph
Bourne and Son, and has so continued until the present day. Joseph
Bourne died in 1860, and his son in 1869, and the works are still
carried on, under the old trading style, by the family. In 1851 a medal
was awarded to Mr. Bourne for his stone bottles.

In addition to the extensions required from time to time at Denby to
provide for these continual augmentations arising from the closing
of the smaller works, the business has so extended as to necessitate
considerable additions and improvements. Excellent machinery has been
applied to the blunging and other processes, and instead of the old
process of getting rid of the water from the slip by evaporation,
the clay is obtained therefrom by the patented process invented by
Messrs. Needham and Kite, Vauxhall, London, ten of their presses being
employed, turning out at least 25 tons per day of workable clay. The
class of ware produced has not varied to any extent, though an advance
in shape and quality is evident from a comparison with some of the
earlier specimens extant. The great bulk of the stoneware produced by
Messrs. Bourne and Son is the kind known as the salt-glazed stoneware,
which, on account of its peculiar vitreous and non-absorbent qualities,
is in great demand not only in the home market, but in all parts of
the world. About the year 1836 a considerable change was made in the
size and form of the salt-glazed kilns, and for these improvements
Mr. Joseph Bourne obtained a patent. The old kilns were only half the
height of the present ones, and had each five chimneys. To these, what
may be called an upper storey has been added, and, while the lower
half is fired by mouths opening into the kiln and the flame passing
_perpendicularly up the kiln_, the upper portion is fed by fires
passing out of the kiln by means of _flues at the side_, and the
modern kilns have only one chimney, thus securing a better consumption
of smoke and lessening the objectionable results which would follow
from such a dense volume of smoke proceeding from a low chimney. Since
this patent was taken out an additional improvement has been made by
the erection on the top of each kiln of a separate small oven, in which
biscuit or terra-cotta fancy articles can be burnt, these being simply
burnt by the heat passing up the chimney and from the top of the kiln,
but no flame or salt-glaze reaching the goods. Much thought and care
as well as considerable expense have been expended during the last
twenty years to perfect the manufacture of telegraph insulators, and
the very large business transactions in this department proves that the
enterprise of the firm has not been fruitless.

Messrs. Bourne and Son have for many years possessed the exclusive
right to manufacture Mr. Varley’s Patent Double V. Insulators, and
since the transfer of the telegraphs to the Government, the firm have
executed immense quantities for that department of the public service.
A demand having recently arisen for white-glazed ink and other bottles,
additional appliances have been provided on the most approved and
modern principles, which have enabled the firm to produce a class
of ware of this description unrivalled alike for its excellence and
appearance.

  [Illustration: Figs. 107 to 109.]

The main productions of the works are as follows:--

In bottles, which are the staple production, almost every variety are
manufactured in large quantities both in the patented vitreous stone,
and white glazed, varieties of ink-bottles of every shape and size
are made by thousands weekly, as are also ale, porter, ginger-beer,
blacking, fruit, and every other kind of bottles. Spirit and other
liquor bottles, with handles, up to a very large size, are also made.
Feet-warmers, carriage-warmers, and medical appliances, with or without
patent screw stoppers; spittoons, tobacco-jars, churns, mortars
and pestles, pipkins, bird fountains, inkstands, feeding-bottles,
candlesticks, pork-pie moulds, and every variety of domestic
vessels, are made. Druggists’ shop-jars, snuff-jars, spirit-barrels,
pudding-moulds, &c., many of them highly ornamented, are also made. The
filters are of excellent construction, and good form, and are made to
purify from 5 to 30 gallons per day each.

“Hunting Jugs”--a name by which a certain class of jugs with raised
ornaments consisting of hunting subjects, sometimes a stag, at others
a fox, chased by horsemen and dogs; and with other relief subjects of
trees, bee-hives, windmills, and men seated smoking or drinking, &c.,
are called--are made here to a great extent, and of the hardest and
most durable quality, and with an excellent glaze. Some of these are
made with greyhound handles of very clever and effective design, of the
class shown on Fig. 98. Upright jugs, or canettes, of the same general
character, are also made, as are also plain jugs. Jars, too, are a
staple branch of the Denby manufacture, and for preserves, pickles,
jellies, marmalades, &c., are considered to be of the best quality.
They are made of the most approved shapes, and of every variety of
size, covered and uncovered; one great advantage of this make being
the great width of the mouth, ensuring cleanliness, and preventing the
waste that occurs with an overhanging shoulder. The same remark holds
good with regard to the stew-pots.

In terra-cotta, which is of a remarkably light and fine quality, and
of a warm buff colour, many elegant articles are made. These are
flower vases of various designs, lotus vases, garden and other vases,
wine-coolers, water-bottles, ewers with snake handles, flower-stands,
Stilton-cheese stands and trays, fern stands, fonts, Indian scent jars,
butter coolers, mignionette boxes, and many other articles of artistic
excellence.

The marks used by the Denby Pottery are as follows:--

  [Illustration:

    VITREOUS STONE BOTTLE
    BOURNE & SON
    PATENTEES,
    DENBY POTTERY
    NEAR DERBY.

    BELPER & DENBY
    BOURNES,
    POTTERY
    DERBYSHIRE.

    J. BOURNE & SON.
    PATENTEES
    DENBY POTTERIES
    NEAR DERBY.

    J. BOURNE & SON.
    PATENTEE S
    DENBY POTTERY
    NEAR DERBY.

  Figs. 110 to 113.]

But besides these, which, by the way, are only used upon some of the
goods, the great bulk being made without any mark at all, there are
others which it is not necessary to particularise.


                               SHIPLEY.

These works were commenced about 1825 on the estate of Edward Miller
Mundy, Esq., of Shipley Hall, by whom the buildings were erected, in
consequence of the discovery of valuable beds of clay. They were first
carried on by some working potters from the Staffordshire district,
and the ordinary classes of goods in “cane” or “yellow” ware were
produced, as were also Rockingham ware tea-pots and other articles.
These were made to a considerable extent, and of good quality, but the
works did not answer. They were next taken by a Mr. Waite, a blacking
manufacturer, from London, who commenced making stoneware bottles
for his own blacking, and other articles of general use. Eventually,
in 1845, the works passed into the hands of Mr. Bourne, of the Denby
pottery, and were carried on by him. The clay at Shipley was of two
kinds--one was obtained from the hard seam coal after the coal was
worked, at a depth of 250 yards. This was of a beautiful and extremely
fine quality, but was of itself difficult to work owing to a want of
tenacity. It was found, however, that by using in equal proportions
this clay and another known as the Waterloo seam, which was about 100
yards from the surface, an excellent body was produced. At this period
the coal mines on the estate furnished saline and chalybeate waters,
which were much in repute; and bottles, specially designed for these
waters, were made in large quantities at these works. Some of these
bottles are still preserved, and are of excellent material. They bear
impressed on the side a garter ribbon, on which are the words In me
suprema Salus, enclosing the name SHIPLEY SALINE WATER in three lines.
In 1856 the Shipley pottery was closed; the workmen, plant, &c., being
removed to, and incorporated with, the Denby pottery.


                               ALFRETON.

During the last, and the early part of the present century, brown ware
of common quality, and red-ware pancheons, &c., were made at Alfreton,
but have long been discontinued. Pilkington, who wrote in 1789, says,
“There are also here six malt offices, and two potteries of the brown
earthen ware.” The site of the last of these pot sheds, I am informed
by Mr. Rowbottom, was purchased, in 1845, by the Gas Company, for their
works, and during the progress of building, &c., only the commonest
brown ware was seen.


                                CRICH.

Somewhat extensive pot works existed here, on Morewood Moor, in the
middle and latter part of last century, or probably much earlier.
In 1763 they belonged to a Mr. Thomas Dodd, who in that year became
bankrupt. The estates were somewhat extensive, and their sale--land
and houses, &c.--covered three days. The sale was “at the house of Mr.
Jonathan Kendall, known by the sign of the Peacock, near Alfreton, in
Derbyshire.” The following is a copy of the description of the lots in
which the pot works occur:--

   Lot 1. A large commodious Dwelling House, called Crich Pot
   House, standing in Wheatcroft, within the said parish of Crich,
   together with the Garden, walled round, and planted with Wall
   Fruit, and a Summer House within; and all the Outhouses, Barns,
   Stables, Cowhouses, Workrooms, Pot furnace, Warehouses and
   other Edifices therto belonging. And also those six several
   closes or parcels of enclosed land lying and being in Wheatcroft
   aforesaid, therto adjoining and belonging, containing by
   estimation about 38 acres, and being tythe free and paying a
   chief rent of Two pence halfpenny per ann. And also the Potter’s
   Clay upon all the commons or waste grounds within the Manor of
   Lea (within which Manor the before mentioned premises lie), all
   which are now in the occupation of Mr. Thomas Wheldon, or his
   assigns.

   Lot 2. A Leasehold estate for the reversion of a term of 99
   years, which commenced at Lady Day, 1744, of one acre of Land
   to be fenced out of the South-east corner of a certain Close in
   Wheatcroft aforesaid, commonly called Agnes, otherwise Annis
   Bottom, under the yearly rent of one pound. Upon which said
   acre of Land there is now built and standing a good new Pot
   House, with Workrooms, Pot furnace, Warehouses, and all other
   Edifices and Apartments necessary for a Pottery, now also in the
   possession of the said Mr. Wheldon.

   Lot 3. A Close (being formerly three Closes) in Plaistow, within
   the parish of Crich aforesaid, containing about 8 acres, being
   tythe free, together with a Windmill, Kiln for drying Corn, and
   Blacksmith’s Shop, standing thereupon, being only separated from
   the fold-yard of the aforesaid house, called Crich Pot-house, by
   a narrow Lane (called Dark Lane) which said Close pays a Chief
   rent of £6 per ann., and is now in the holding of the said Mr.
   Wheldon.

   Lot 4. A Dwelling House with a Barn and Cowhouse, and two Closes
   of Land adjoining, tythe free, in Plaistow aforesaid, containing
   about five acres, paying only a Chief rent of 4d. per ann., and
   now in the occupation of John Bacon and Mr. Thomas Wheldon.

   Lot 5. A Messuage, House, Barn, and Stable, Two Cowhouses,
   and other Edifices in Wheatcroft aforesaid, and also a large
   Orchard, planted with Fruit Trees, and six several Closes therto
   belonging, tythe free, containing about 18 acres, formerly in
   the holding of William Street, deceased, paying a Chief rent
   of Two pence halfpenny per ann., and subject to an annuity of
   Twenty shillings a year, payable thereout to the Vicar of Crich,
   for the time being. N.B.--There’s a large quantity of Potter’s
   Clay in this Farm.

“The Potters’ Clay Delph,” or “Delph of Pot Clay,” is also stated to go
through two other of the lots.

Mr. Robinson, who has searched into matters regarding the Crich
Pottery, gives me the following particulars. They were situated near
the “Pot-House Farm,” as the place is still called. The buildings still
remain and are known as the “Pot-House Hillocks.” After the bankruptcy
of Thomas Dodd, the works were carried on by George Bacon, and at his
death passed into the hands of his son, Edward Bacon, who gave up the
earthenware manufacture and converted the place into a brickyard; this
also he closed about 1810. Of the ware made here, which appears to have
been brown ware, like that of Brampton, nothing reliable is known.
A posset-pot, formerly belonging to the landlord of the Horse and
Groom, a public-house a mile off, is said to be an undoubted example;
it bears the names of the then landlord and his wife--“John and Mary
Wood, 1794.” A spill-board weight, bearing on one side the date 1760,
with initials, and on the other the initials G B (supposed to be George
Bacon) and a fleur-de-lis, is also supposed to have been made here.


                            LANGLEY MILLS.

_Langley Mill Pottery._--This pottery was established by
its present owner, Mr. James Calvert, in 1865, and was the first
established in the neighbourhood. The productions are vitrified
stoneware of similar character and quality to that of Messrs. Bourne at
Denby. In this ware a large trade is done in ginger-beer, ink, beer,
and other bottles, and all the usual domestic vessels--jars, pitchers,
hot-water bottles, foot-warmers, jugs, mugs, &c.--are produced from
clay found in the neighbourhood. The works are extensive and well
arranged, consisting of three kilns for brown ware and one for Bristol
ware.


                               ILKESTON.

The “_Ilkeston Potteries_” were established by the late Mr. George
Evans in 1807, and were carried on by him until his decease, in 1832,
when he was succeeded by his son, Mr. Richard Evans, the present sole
proprietor of the concern. At first, and during the lifetime of Mr.
George Evans, Derbyshire stone bottles alone were made, and these
are still manufactured to a large extent. By the present proprietor
the buildings have been considerably increased, and a general
pottery added for the production of useful articles in stoneware and
ornamental terra-cotta goods. The present productions of the works
are in stoneware bottles, jars, pans, &c., of all sizes and of every
usual form; filters of an improved construction; carriage, foot, and
other warmers; sanitary pipes, and ware of every kind, &c., &c.; and
in terra-cotta, vases, pedestals, flower and tree boxes and pots,
garden-edgings, chimney-tops, &c., of various designs, and all the more
usual productions of fire-clay goods.


                               PINXTON.

The village of Pinxton (a large parish in East Derbyshire, close on the
borders of Nottinghamshire) is principally inhabited by colliers and
other “hardy sons of toil,” who work in the ironstone mines and at the
furnaces of the neighbourhood. The manor belongs to the family of Coke,
the same family as the Cokes of Trusley and the Cokes of Melbourne,
and to one of this family, John Coke, Esq., the establishment of the
china works is owing. Mr. John Coke was the youngest brother of D’Ewes
Coke, Esq., the lord of the manor; the second brother being Sir William
Coke, Judge of the Supreme Court, Ceylon, who died at Trincomalee, in
Ceylon. The present head of the family is Lieut.-Col. E. T. Coke, of
Debdale. Mr. John Coke, who was born in 1775, passed several of the
early years of his life at Dresden, and there, doubtless, acquired that
love for porcelain ware which induced him to commence the manufactory
at Pinxton on his return to this country. Having an idea that some
clays found on the family estates near Pinxton might be made available
for the manufacture of china ware, Mr. Coke entered into correspondence
with Mr. Duesbury, of the Derby China Works, and sent him samples of
his clays for trial and experiment. Whatever encouragement or otherwise
he received from Mr. Duesbury--and I have reason to believe that
encouragement was _not_ given--the result of his own convictions and
his own trials, &c., determined Mr. Coke on starting the works, and he
ultimately made an engagement with William Billingsley, of the Derby
China Works (which see, page 102); and having built a somewhat large
and very conveniently arranged factory, commenced the manufacture of
china ware in 1796.

William Billingsley was the son of William and Mary Billingsley, of
the parish of St. Alkmund, Derby. In 1774 he was apprenticed by his
widowed mother to Mr. Duesbury, the proprietor of the Derby China
Manufactory, for five years, “to learn the art of painting upon
china or porcelain ware,” as I have already shown in my notice of
Billingsley on page 101, _ante_. In 1796 he left the Derby China
Works, where he had been employed for the long period of twenty-two
years, and removed to Pinxton, occupying, with his wife, his wife’s
mother, and two daughters, a part of the factory built by Mr. Coke.
Here Billingsley succeeded in producing that beautiful granular body
which he afterwards perfected at Nantgarw and at Swansea; and here,
too, stimulated by Mr. Coke’s good taste, he introduced faultless
forms in his services and a high style of excellence in decoration.
He brought with him several experienced workmen and artists from the
Derby Works, and took into the factory, and instructed, several young
people of Pinxton and its neighbourhood. His own time was thus so
fully occupied with the management of the works, with the arrangement
of the concern, and with the “overlooking” of the persons employed,
that, unfortunately, his own skill and his own splendid colouring of
roses and other flowers were lost to the manufacture; and thus we do
not find that the expressed fear of his late Derby employers that “his
going into another factory will put them in the way of doing flowers
in the same way, which they are at present entirely ignorant of,” was
sustained. In fact, while employed by Mr. Duesbury, Billingsley was in
every way master of the art he had been taught; and he had acquired a
peculiar method--entirely peculiar to himself--of painting roses which,
with his free and truly artistic grouping and harmonious arrangement
of colours, made his pieces so much sought after, that orders were
constantly sent in for objects “painted with Billingsley’s flowers.”
At this period of course his whole time was devoted to painting, and
his heart was in his work. After leaving his employer, his attention
was naturally, in the new sphere in which he found himself at Pinxton,
almost wholly given to the _practical_ instead of the _Art_
portion of the establishment, and thus none, or scarcely any, of the
known examples of Pinxton china bear evidence of being his handiwork.
Indeed, it is not too much to say that, from the time when he closed
his connection with the Derby Works, his Art-skill declined, but his
manufacturing skill became more and more apparent.

The works at Pinxton were built by the side of the canal, and the
workshops formed three sides of a square. These are still in existence
at the present day, and are shown in the accompanying vignette, from
a sketch made for the purpose. They are now converted into cottages,
and are occupied by colliers and others. The kilns, &c., have entirely
disappeared. The place and cottages are still called “China Square,” or
“Factory Square.”

Through some misunderstanding or other, the arrangement between Messrs.
Coke and Billingsley was not of long duration, and in a very few
years--probably about 1800 or 1802--Billingsley left the place and
removed to Mansfield, where, it is said, he for some time occupied
himself in decorating and finishing china ware which he bought in the
white state in Staffordshire. He afterwards, as I have already shown,
removed to Torksey, Worcester, Nantgarw, Swansea, and Coalport, and
died about 1827 or 1828.

  [Illustration: Fig. 114.]

Mr. Coke married in 1806 and settled at Debdale Hall, where he died
in 1841, in his sixty-sixth year, leaving his estates to Lieut.-Col.
Coke, their present possessor. At Debdale are preserved, with religious
care, some of the finest examples ever made at Pinxton. These pieces
were brought there by the founder of the works, Mr. John Coke just
spoken of, and have remained there ever since. They consist of large
semicircular spill-stands, mugs, &c., beautifully painted with
views, one of which, a view of the family seat of Brookhill Hall, is
remarkably fine. Some of the stands are grounded in the Dresden canary
colour, and the whole are very choice and unique examples of Pinxton
porcelain.

The group of china here engraved is a selection of pieces made during
Billingsley’s time at Pinxton. The pieces are all remarkable for
the beauty of the body and of the glaze, and some of them are also
noticeable for the excellence of the gilding. The coffee-pot in the
centre is one of a set bearing, in oval borders, views of different
places either in Derbyshire or elsewhere. These landscapes are
excellently painted, of a peculiar brownish effect which pervades the
whole colouring, by James Hadfield, who was the best landscape painter
at the works. The views on the pieces which have come under my notice
are of local and other places: for instance, Pinxton Church, Darley
Hall, Hartington Bridge, Ashwood Dale, Buxton, Wingerworth Hall, Tong
Castle, Saltram, Menai Straits, Wanstead Church, Frog Hall, Caerphilly
Castle, &c. The teapot and stand are of elegant shape, unusually narrow
and carefully gilt; the stand is of peculiar form. The cup and saucer
have the “Derby sprig” (Tournay sprig), as it is frequently called. The
coffee-mug and flower-pot tell their own tale.

  [Illustration: Fig. 115.]

After the close of Billingsley’s connection with the Pinxton Works
they were carried on by Mr. Coke with the assistance of a Mr. Banks.
Afterwards Mr. Coke took Mr. John Cutts to manage the concern, and
he became a partner in the works. In the later part of the time
the manufactory was carried on by Cutts alone. At the close of the
Pinxton Works, which took place about 1818, Mr. Cutts removed into
Staffordshire--fixing himself at Lane End--where he commenced
business; at first buying ware in the white and finishing it for sale.
In 1811, Davies says, “There is a considerable porcelain manufactory at
Pinxton, which finds employment for several hands.”

After Billingsley’s removal from Pinxton the character of the ware
underwent a change. The granular body of which I have spoken as
produced, and afterwards brought to such perfection, by him, was his
own secret, and he zealously kept it. On leaving Pinxton this secret,
naturally, went with him, and, of course, the goods produced after
that time were of a different and much inferior body. The later ware
approached pretty closely the ordinary china body of the time, and had
a slightly bluish tint in the glaze. The decoration was also, as a
rule, not equal to what it had been in the earlier days of the factory.

Among the workmen brought from Derby along with Billingsley, were
Thomas Moore, a clever thrower; Ash, also a clever thrower and
turner, and many others of repute. Among the painters, &c., were
James Hadfield, a good landscape painter; Edward Rowland, a landscape
painter; Morrell, who painted landscapes and flowers; Richard Robins,
from London; William Alvey, and others, including Slater and Marriott.
Alvey left Pinxton about 1803, and became master of Edingley School,
near Southwell, where he died in 1867, aged about eighty-three. He
had a numerous family, some of whom re-settled at Pinxton. Alvey was
held in high respect at Edingley, and was possessed of remarkable
natural gifts; he was an excellent musician, a clever draughtsman and
colourist, a first-rate mathematician, a splendid penman, a very fair
land-surveyor, and a poet of no mean order. He was fond of drawing and
painting to the last.

No especial mark was used at the Pinxton Works. The number of the
pattern was occasionally given, and sometimes a workman’s mark was
added; and although other marks _were_ used, none seem to have
been adopted as distinctive of the works. A writing letter _P_
and a Roman capital letter P have both been noticed as occurring on
isolated specimens. A tea service, named to me by Capt. G. Talbot Coke,
bears, however, inside the lid of the teapot, the word _Pinxton_,
written in gold letters. The service is of a beautifully clear white
china, with broad edges of burnished gold; a handsome arabesque border
of red, blue, and gold ornamenting each piece.

One peculiarity connected with the Pinxton China Works remains to be
noticed: it is the issuing of china tokens, _i.e._, tokens representing
different values of money, made of china, and payable as money among
the workpeople and others, including shopkeepers. These were issued in
a time of difficulty, so that they were only temporary conveniences,
and thus they possess great interest. They were of two distinct kinds.
The general form was a circular disc of white china, thicker in the
middle than at the edges--in fact, exactly of the form of a common
magnifying glass--and bore on the obverse a figure of 5 in the centre,
and the words, “_Let the Bearer have in goods five shillings_,” in
four lines across. On the reverse a similar figure 5 and the words,
“_which place to account with John Coke, Pinxton. Decr. 24th, 1801_,”
in five lines across. The writing is in blue, and the tokens are well
glazed. They were issued of various values, as 10_s._, 7_s._ 6_d._,
5_s._, 3_s._ 6_d._, 1_s._ 6_d._, and 1_s._ respectively. The one here
engraved belongs to W. S. Coke, Esq., of Brookhill, and I am indebted
for it to his nephew Capt. J. Talbot Coke. Others bore, as shown on the
next engraving, simply the figure of value, gilt or painted on an oval
disc. These tokens were used as promissory notes, and when returned to
the works by their holders their value in money was given for them,
and they were broken up and destroyed. They were payable in and around
Pinxton, on one side as far as Sutton, but their payment did not extend
to Mansfield. They were called “Mr. Coke’s coin,” or “Chainé money”
(china money), in the provincialism of the locality.[35]

  [Illustration:

    _Let the
    Bearer have_
    5
    _in goods
    five shillings_

    _which place
    to account with_
    5
    _John Coke
    Pinxton  Dec^r 24^{th}
    1801._

  Fig. 116.]

  [Illustration:

    7_s._
    5_s._

  Figs. 117 & 118.]

It is pleasant to see how the memory of the old china works at Pinxton
is cherished by its inhabitants of the present day, among whom some
of the people who worked there are still, at a ripe old age, living.
One of these, in her eighty-fifth year, who began to work at the
factory when but a child of some eleven years of age (at that time
named Elizabeth Smith), and became ultimately the chief burnisher of
the works, was, when I saw her a few years back, in full possession
of all her faculties, and delighted in describing, with marvellous
accuracy, all the processes employed. To her wonderful memory, and to
that of others, as well as to documents and long personal research,
I owe the information which I, in 1868, for the first time, gave in
the _Art-Journal_, and now repeat, in regard to this interesting
manufactory.


                              WIRKSWORTH.

Wirksworth is much more intimately mixed up with the history of the
Ceramic Art than is usually imagined, and yet but little is known
of the works which were there carried on, or of their productions.
Dugdale, in 1799, says, “About forty years ago, a manufacture of
porcelain was attempted, but it proved unsuccessful.... It was in the
Holland Manor House that the unsuccessful manufacture of porcelain
was attempted;” and Davis, in 1811, repeats the same thing: “In the
Holland Manor House the manufacture of porcelain was attempted, about
forty years ago, but proving unsuccessful, it was relinquished.”
Holland House, where this manufacture was carried on, was the Manor
House of the manor of Holland, otherwise Richmonds, which was given by
Thomas, Earl of Lancaster, to Sir Robert Holland, in which family it
remained until the attainder of Henry Holland, Duke of Exeter, in 1461;
it afterwards belonged to Margaret, Countess of Richmond and Derby,
and was subsequently granted by the Crown to Ralph Gell. In 1745,
Philip Gell leased the manor to “Robert Atkinson and Francis Parry, of
Lincoln’s Inn, gentlemen,” and to “Andrew Wilkinson, of Boroughbridge,
com. York, Esq., and Thomas Wilkinson, Esq., brother of the said Andrew
Wilkinson.” In 1777 it was “leased by Philip Gell, Esq., of Hopton, to
Richard Arkwright, of Cromford, cotton merchant.”

In this latter lease (dated 6th November, 1777), the china works
are thus named: “All those several messuages, tenements, or
dwelling-houses, and all other buildings, warehouses, workshops, and
appurtenances, situate, standing, and being in Wirksworth, in the said
county of Derby, heretofore used for the making and manufacturing of
China Ware, and now in the tenure or occupation of the said Philip
Gell, his assignee or assigns, tenant or under-tenants.” So that at
that time the first china works had probably ceased to be in operation.
In 1793, by deed dated 1st November, Richard Arkwright, Esq., assigned
the remainder of the lease to Charles Hurt, Esq., of Wirksworth, in
the following words: “All those several messuages, tenements, or
dwelling-houses, and all other the buildings, warehouses, workshops,
and appurtenances, situate, standing, and being in Wirksworth,
heretofore used for y^e making and manufacturing of china, but now for
picking cotton.”

My late friend, Mr. T. N. Ince, to whom Wirksworth is indebted for much
patient research into its early history, thus wrote to me regarding
the china works, having at my request turned his attention to the
matter:--“I much regret that I did not extract from the original deed
of co-partnership, which I once had in my hands, at least its date,
parties, and the like. My opinion is that it was begun about the middle
of last century, and did not continue more than a few years. I know the
Hurts of Alderwasley, Gells of the Gatehouse and Hopton, Sir Thomas
Burdett of Foremark, and many others were partners--nearly the same
who were partners in the English and Welsh Mineral Company, of whose
concerns were many papers in a bundle in my grandfather and father’s
office, labelled ‘Tissington _v._ Burdett and others;’ and amongst
them, Mr. Julius Cæsar Robiglio, of Hopton, gentleman, who was said
to have been present at a duel in Italy, in which the then Philip
Gell of Hopton slew his antagonist and fled to England with Mr. Cæsar
Robiglio, who, I have heard my mother say, was a most gentlemanlike
man. He died at Hopton, and was buried at Wirksworth or Carsington. The
premises called ‘China House Yard’ were afterwards the property of the
late Charles Hurt, Esq., senr. His son, Charles Hurt, junr., died in
1834, on whose death it was sold to the late Mr. John Wilson, maltster;
whose son, Mr. Daniel Wilson, wine merchant, is the present owner.” Mr.
Wilson, who has examined his title deeds specially for me, tells me
they contain no information as to the china works.

Some years ago, during excavations which were being made, portions of
saggers and of china were found; some of these are in my own possession.

It is said that after leaving Pinxton and other places, Billingsley
attempted to establish china works here; being probably led to do so
by the fact of felspar being abundant in the neighbourhood. Of this,
however, there is no proof. Earthenware is also said at one time to
have been made here; but of this, also, there is no proof.


                              DALE ABBEY.

Encaustic paving tiles were made here, within the grounds of the abbey,
in the fourteenth century. The remains of the kiln in which they were
fired were discovered some years back, and in and around it were
several tiles and fragments of tiles.

  [Illustration: Fig. 119.]

  [Illustration:

    VOL. II.      PLATE I.

  MEDIÆVAL PAVING TILES MADE AT REPTON.]


                                REPTON.

Encaustic tiles were made here in the fourteenth century, and the
kiln in which they were fired, and a vast number of unfinished tiles
and fragments of tiles, were discovered in 1866. The site of the tile
works was within the old abbey walls, and was accidentally brought
to light by the boys of Repton School, who were busying themselves
in levelling a piece of land for their cricket ground. During their
work they came upon patches of a stiff red clay with fragments of
tiles; and, presently afterwards, found some regular layers of them,
face downwards. Next they came upon masses of brickwork, which, upon
careful clearing, turned out to be a kiln for the firing of the
tiles. Of this, and of the tiles found within and around it, I made
careful measurements and drawings, and some of these are shown on the
accompanying engravings.[36] The kiln, Fig. 119, consisted of two
series of arches (each series consisting of six arches alternating with
the same number of openings) over what may be termed two vaults, each 7
feet 6 inches long, by 2 feet 6 inches wide, and about 1 foot 10 inches
in height. The arches were formed of chamfered bricks or tiles, those
composing the actual arch measuring 7¼ inches in breadth at the square,
or upper end; 2¾ inches in breadth at the lower end; 7¼ inches in
length; 4½ inches in length on the square sides; 3½ on the chamfer; 1¼
inches in thickness at the upper end: and three quarters of an inch in
thickness at the lower end. The basement, four inches in thickness, was
formed of bricks or tiles. Upon this were built up, at distances of 4½
inches apart, the chamfered bricks from which the arches sprung, these
being placed broadends together and so forming an hexagon. Between
these the remainder of the wall, to a level with the top of the arches,
was formed of encaustic tiles, which being 4½ inches square exactly
fill up the width. These encaustic tiles, some hundreds in number,
were of various patterns, but evidently unfinished, being quite soft
and pliable. The floor of the vault was paved with tiles, and at the
entrance was a stone wall on either side, and against the wall-pier was
placed the curious relief tile, Fig. 120.

  [Illustration: Fig. 120.]

The tiles and fragments of tiles exhibit some examples different in
form, as well as in material and in design, from any others which have
come under my notice. One of these, on Fig. 121 (repeated so as to form
the complete pattern in a lozenge), is of very light stone-coloured
clay. The foliated pattern is in very high and bold relief, and the
whole face of the tile is covered with a rich green glaze. It measures
10 inches on its angles, and 14 inches from point to point on its base,
and it is 1¾ inches thick. Fig. 120 is of the same material and general
character; the pattern in high relief, and the face covered with green
glaze. It measures 8 inches by 6½, and is 1¾ inches thick. Another
green glazed tile, also with the pattern in relief, is shown on Fig.
123. Its design, which is extremely elegant, consists of the crowned
initial of the blessed Virgin, ([Illustration: M] ,) each limb of the
letter M terminating in a crowned letter A and foliage. This, I take
it, simply means “Ave, Maria.”

  [Illustration: Fig. 121.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 122 and 123.]

  [Illustration:

    VOL. II.      PLATE II.

  MEDIÆVAL PAVING TILES MADE AT REPTON.]

  [Illustration:

    VOL. II.      PLATE III.

  MEDIÆVAL PAVING TILES FOUND AT WIRKSWORTH.]

Of the ordinary class of red and yellow tiles, a very large variety
of patterns was found. These consisted of single, four, nine, and
sixteen tile patterns of great beauty, and, in many cases, unusual
intricacy; border tiles of strikingly beautiful design; heraldic tiles
representing the armorial bearings of many local families of note, as
well as those of the monarch, &c.; alphabet tiles, bearing the entire
alphabet in Lombardic capitals; and grotesque, astronomical, and other
devices. Some of these are represented on plates I. and II., and it
is worthy of remark, as showing the extent to which this manufacture
was carried by the monks at Repton, that tiles still existing in, or
exhumed on the sites of, many of the old churches and religious houses
of this and the adjoining counties, are identical with those discovered
in this kiln, and are therefore proved to be of Repton make.

  [Illustration: Figs. 124 and 125.]

Another description (to which the same remark will also apply) of tiles
found in this kiln is very peculiar. On these, the pattern, in sharp
and tolerably fine lines, is simply indented, or incised, into the
soft clay, and not filled in with “slip.” These, which for convenience
I will call “incised tiles,” are of dark blue or black colour. Some
of these patterns will be found in Figs. 124 and 125. Another very
singular unique tile of this class is given of its full size on Fig.
122. It bears a head within a wreath, and is covered with green glaze.
Another curious and unique tile, in which the simple device of four
saltires within a square has been literally _cut_ into the clay,
not impressed, was also found.

  [Illustration: Figs. 126 to 128.]

Having described the Repton kiln it will be well in the present chapter
to give some few particulars of other remains of a like kind. In
1833, my late friend, Mr. H. Eginton, discovered a tile kiln on land
formerly belonging to the Priory of Great Malvern. It consisted of two
semicircular arches, strongly built, separated from each other by a
thick and massive wall or pier. The length of the kiln was 35 feet,
and the width of the openings 2 feet 3 inches. In each of the archways
was a flooring of stone, about two feet from the ground, composed of
three slabs in width; the centre one serving as a key-stone to the
others, but more especially, in my opinion, so arranged as to allow the
fumes of the charcoal to have proper access to the chamber where the
tiles were placed. The place for the fire was on the ground, beneath
this elevated flooring, and the earth from long action of the heat
had become of extreme hardness, and had all the appearance of a thick
pavement of limestone. There was no aperture for smoke, so that the
process was literally that of the “_smother kiln_.” The arches
were double, the outer being constructed of tiles, the inner of bricks,
which from long action of the fire had become completely vitrified.
The flooring on which the tiles were placed for burning was two inches
in thickness, and at the time of the discovery a number of the tiles
were found lying in their places as they did when the fire smouldered
away beneath them four centuries before. The kiln was placed seven feet
under ground--most probably to prevent injury to the structure from
expansion by heat--and was firmly backed and bedded in with blocks of
Malvern ragstone. The tiles found were identical with some of those
now remaining in Great and Little Malvern churches. Another kiln was
discovered in 1837, at St. Mary Witton, near Droitwich. It consisted of
arched chambers similar to those at Malvern, and separated from each
other in like manner by a strong intermediate central wall or pier. The
arches were 2 feet 2 inches in height, 2 feet 4 inches in width, and
of several feet in length, and were partly composed of tiles, partly
of brick, and highly vitrified with the heat. In them, as at Malvern,
a considerable quantity of charcoal was found. Other remains of kilns
have been discovered in Wiltshire, in Sussex, and in Staffordshire,
and in the latter county the family name of Telwright, or Tilewright,
doubtless taking its origin from makers of tiles, is one of great
antiquity.

  [Illustration: Fig. 129. Tile Kiln Discovered near Farringdon
  Road, London.]

Another remarkably interesting kiln was discovered in London in the
course of excavations in forming the Metropolitan Railway, close to
the Farringdon Street Station. The kiln, which rests upon the natural
bed of clay of the locality, was found about fourteen feet below the
surface level of Turnmill Street, or the natural bank of the Fleet
River. Over it was an immense accumulation of rubbish, doubtless caused
by the Great Fire of London. An account of this kiln has been drawn up
by my friend Mr. J. E. Price, to whom I am indebted for the view of the
kiln engraved on Fig. 129. It was about 16 feet long and 10 feet wide,
and consisted of three parallel arches, which averaged 2 feet wide by
1 foot high, separated from each other by a pier of about 1 foot in
width. These arches constituted the furnaces, and supported a level
floor, which was pierced, at equal distances, with a series of openings
each 2 feet long by 5 inches wide. Through these the heat would rise
from below for firing the tiles. On the spaces between the apertures
the tiles were probably placed for burning. There were thirty of these
openings remaining, though in some instances the intervening spaces had
fallen away. The entire structure is composed of plain tiles, similar
to those used for roofing purposes.


                            LITTLE CHESTER.

A manufactory of coarse brown ware formerly existed at Little Chester
near Derby. Fragments of various fictile vessels of much the same
character as the Tickenhall dishes, and also of the same kind as the
Chesterfield brown ware, have from time to time been found, as well as
remains of a potter’s kiln. Nothing, however, is known regarding it.


                              TICKENHALL.

A pottery existed at this place, as early, at all events, as the reign
of Queen Elizabeth; probably much earlier. This is incontestably proved
by remains which have from time to time been exhumed on the spot.
There can, therefore, be no doubt that pottery has for more than three
centuries been uninterruptedly made at this place. In 1650, Philip
Kinder, in his collections towards a History of Derbyshire, preserved
in the Bodleian Library, thus wrote:--“Numa Pompilius here might have
learn’t his ‘Straine of Frugalities’! Here are your best Fictilias made
you; earthern vessels, potts, and pancions, at Tycknall, and carried
all East England through.” This is the earliest mention of Tickenhall
pottery I have met with.

  [Illustration: Figs. 130 and 131.]

Pilkington (1789) says:--“Formerly a very large quantity of earthen
ware was manufactured at this place; but lately the business has very
much declined. It is said, that, since the land in the neighbourhood
has been enclosed, it has been difficult to meet with proper clay.”

The ordinary coarse domestic vessels--“potts and pancions” as they
are called by Kinder--were made, but beyond these there were many
highly-decorated ones, with human heads for handles, &c.; some
fragments of these are in the possession of Sir John Harpur Crewe,
Bart., of Calke Abbey, to whom Tickenhall belongs. The ware was coarse,
but very hard, the colour a dull brown, nearly black, in some instances
with a yellow slip. Sometimes, however, it was of the ordinary red
colour. A mediæval pitcher, or jug, in my own possession, which was
dug up here in the course of draining operations on the site of the old
works, has the body of deep red clay, very hard and compact, and its
upper part is covered with a dark glaze; it has been much blistered
in firing. In Sir John Crewe’s possession is a pilgrim’s bottle,
found here, of the ordinary shape. It is shown on Fig. 130. He has
also portions of two others, the most perfect fragment being nearly
black, and the other of a reddish brown colour. Of these several other
fragments have been found.

  [Illustration: Fig. 132.]

Two apparently well-authenticated examples of bowls, in the possession
of Mr. W. Bemrose, jun., and formerly belonging to Mr. J. J. Briggs,
are shown on Figs. 131 and 132. They are of the ordinary class of
earthenware (like those of the Tofts, Taylors, &c.), of a dark brown
or chocolate colour, well glazed, and ornamented with a white slip.
The larger one bears a very rude representation of a fox-hunt--a
fox and three dogs, and a tree. The smaller one bears a somewhat
gracefully thrown lily, and other ornaments. Another example, in my own
collection, is the candlestick engraved on Fig. 138. It is of precisely
the same kind of ware, with white slip ornaments. The decoration of the
base will be seen to bear a strong resemblance to the outer ornament of
the large bowl.

Perhaps among the most interesting of existing examples are the
fragments engraved on Figs. 133 to 136. These are in the possession
of Sir John Crewe, Bart., and are undoubtedly authentic, having been
dug up on the spot. They are heads formed of a buff clay and “touched”
with a darker slip. Figs. 133 and 136 show the front and back of the
principal of these fragments. The head-dress and ruff indicate the
period to be at all events about the reign of Mary or Elizabeth. Fig.
134 bears the plaited cap of the same period. They are all engraved of
the full size. It will be seen on reference to Figs. 137 and 139 that,
in general character, these heads bear a marked resemblance to some
which were found in 1854 on the site of a mediæval potwork on the North
Cliff at Scarborough. Another vessel there found is engraved in vol.
i., Fig. 299.

  [Illustration: Figs. 133 to 136.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 137 to 139.]


                             KINGS NEWTON.

At this pleasant little village (so celebrated for its hall, now in
ruins, where Charles I. passed a night, and as being the place from
which the family of Hardinge, now represented by “Baron Hardinge, of
Kings Newton,” takes its origin) one of the finest assemblages of
examples of Anglo-Saxon Ceramic Art has been brought to light,[37]
and here, in recent times, pottery of a good quality and excellent
character has been made. The Anglo-Saxon urns[38] were, there can be no
possible doubt, made from the same bed of clay from which the modern
specimens have been produced, but it seems not to have been worked
in intermediate times. About 1852 Mr. Henry Orton (brother to James
Orton, author of “The Three Palaces,” “Excelsior,” &c., and himself a
writer of no mean repute under the _nom de plume_ of “Philo”),
then of the Chauntry House, Kings Newton, considering the bed of
clay at this place well adapted for useful and ornamental purposes,
erected workshops, sheds, and kilns, and commenced the manufacture
of garden-vases, chimney-tops, flower-boxes and pots, brackets, and
a large variety of other articles. These he produced both in their
natural colour and surface-painted and gilded, and many of them were of
excellent design. From one of the beds of clay a fine red terra-cotta
was produced, and from another a fine buff colour was made. Mr.
Orton was so impressed with the importance of these beds for ceramic
purposes, that he caused a number of domestic and ornamental articles
to be made in the Staffordshire potteries from Kings Newton clay, and
the results were highly satisfactory. Circumstances, however, occurred
which prevented his plans being matured, and after a large expenditure
of time and money on his part they were abandoned. The place is now
carried on as a steam brick yard, and the clay is of so good and
tenacious a quality that the maker stamps the name of KINGS
NEWTON on each brick produced.

Of the articles made from this clay (which, being very few, are
now of the utmost rarity), I possess examples. One of these is a
butter-cooler, with perforated cover and twisted handles, formed of
red unglazed clay of remarkably fine and compact character. Another is
a pressed jug, with groups of relief flowers, in a chocolate-coloured
clay; partly lined with white slip inside, and glazed in its
natural colour. The other examples are a terra-cotta flower-vase and
stand of fine light buff-coloured clay, and a two-handled goblet or
drinking-cup, silver lustred, and of excellent quality. This is made of
the brown, or chocolate, clay. The probability is that some day these
clays may be turned to better account than that of making bricks for
railway tunnels.


                          BURTON-UPON-TRENT.

In 1794 a manufactory was established in the neighbourhood of
Burton-on-Trent by Sir Nigel Gresley, Bart., of Drakelow, and C. B.
Adderley, Esq., of Hams Hall (ancestor of the present statesman, the
Right Honourable C. Adderley, M.P.), who died in 1826. In June, 1795,
William Coffee, one of the modellers at the Derby china works, was
engaged for these works. On page 98 I have given a copy of a letter
relating to this engagement; and another letter, also in my possession,
dated “Burton on Trent, June 4th, 1795,” says, “Sir,--My being your
debtor makes it my duty to inform you immediately of my arrival here,
and likewise of my engagement with Sir Nigel Gresley, and Mr. Adderley,
lest you should suppose I had forgot the obligation I lie under to
you,” etc. The works were, I have ascertained, situated “within fifty
yards of Gresley Hall, near the village and castle of Gresley, in
the county of Derby,” with also a place in Burton itself. From some
cause or other the project did not answer the expectations of Sir. N.
Gresley and Mr. Adderley, and about the year 1800 the works passed from
them into the hands of Mr. William Nadin, the father of Mr. Joseph
Nadin of Arthurlie, Burton-on-Trent. Mr. Nadin only carried on the
manufactory for four or five years, when, it having proved a failure,
he discontinued it, and was succeeded by Mr. Burton, of Linton,
Derbyshire, who continued the works for a few years and then closed
them.

During Mr. Nadin’s time the usual classes of ordinary Staffordshire
wares were made, as also was china. In the latter, one great speciality
was boots, shoes, and slippers, which were extensively produced, and
variously ornamented. His now aged son, Mr. J. Nadin, wrote me, in
reference to these, “My father made a large number of china boots and
shoes, and I well remember when about six years old, walking up to
my ankles into a pond of water in a pair of these boots (Wellington
in shape).” He also tells me that when his father “had these works,
he received an order for a magnificent dinner-service--the price was
fixed at £700--for Queen Charlotte, through Colonel Desbrow, her
Chamberlain, but he was never able to execute it, as the china always
came out of the ovens cracked and crazed, though he employed the very
best men he could obtain.” The Duke of Kent is said to have paid the
works a visit, accompanied by Colonel Desbrow. No examples of the
productions of these are, so far as my inquiries go, now known to be in
existence.

About 1832 Mr. William Edwards, a solicitor, of Derby (brother-in-law
of the second Mr. William Duesbury of the Derby china works), in
conjunction with a Mr. Tunnicliffe, commenced an earthenware (yellow
ware) manufactory at the Hay, Burton-on-Trent. Later on the manufacture
of china or “artificial marble” was commenced; workmen having been
brought from the Potteries and from Derby. The works, which were in
High Street, only continued in operation for a very few years, and
the productions were not marked. Mr. Edwards, in his ornamental ware,
confined himself mainly to the production of figures, but they were,
both commercially and artistically, complete failures. “Mr. Edwards’s
artificial marble gods and goddesses, made at the Burton-on-Trent
works, came out of the oven with their limbs twisted into every
conceivable form.” On Mr. Edwards’s failure the works were closed, and
he removed to Butt House, near Woodville, at that time known as Wooden
Box. Mr. Edwards employed some really good workmen, amongst whom was a
clever modeller named Wornell, who, besides, was an excellent stuffer
of birds. Some good examples of Wornell’s work are in the possession
of Mr. Abram Bass, by whom much of this information has kindly been
supplied to me.


                             SWADLINCOTE.

_Swadlincote Potteries._--The works of Messrs. Sharpe, Brothers, and
Co. were established, and erected, by the late Mr. Thomas Sharpe, in
1821, and were carried on by him, alone, as “Thomas Sharpe” until 1838,
in which year he died. They were then continued by his brothers under
the style of “Sharpe, Brothers, and Co.,” under which firm they are
still carried on; the sole proprietor being the last surviving brother,
Mr. Edmund Sharpe. The productions of the firm are the same as those of
the general district, viz., the “Derbyshire Ironstone Cane (or Yellow)
Ware” (a name by which this ware has for upwards of a century been
known, and which is the speciality of the district); buff drab ware,
fire-proof ware, Rockingham ware, mottled ware, and black lustre ware.
In “Derbyshire Ironstone” plain and pressed jugs and mugs; bowls of
various kinds; ewers and basins, tea-pots, cups, and jars of various
kinds; beef, jelly, bread, stew, and other pans; and every description
of household vessels are made, as they are also in the buff drab ware.
In the Rockingham, mottled, and black lustre wares, tea and coffee pots
in endless variety of patterns, “Bohemian,” “American,” “Rebecca,”
“Shakspere,” “Fuchsia,” “Ivy,” “Chinese,” “Cottage,” “Mandarin,” “Royal
Flute,” “Gipsy,” &c., &c.; pressed and plain jugs and mugs of good
designs; and many other useful articles are made. Blue printed goods
are also produced.

Among many ornamental specialities of these works may be named the
“Toby Fill-pot” jugs, which are made in both coloured and Rockingham
ware, on much the same model as the older jugs of that name; one is
shown on Fig. 140.

  [Illustration: Fig. 140.]

Sanitary earthenware is a great speciality of these works, and is
produced in cane-colour, white, and blue printed varieties, as
well as, occasionally, of a highly decorative character. In these,
plug-basins, closet-basins with Sharpe’s Patent Direct Action,
requiring no fans, but acting on the principle of a hollow rim with
graduated perforations; traps, cabinet wash-hand stands of excellent
and convenient construction, and other articles, are extensively made.
Besides the Home trade, Messrs. Sharpe export in large quantities to
Canada, the United States, Nova Scotia, South Africa, New Zealand,
India, Australia, Africa, the Sandwich Islands, Germany, Holland,
Russia, Prussia, Hungary, &c.

The mark used by Mr. Thomas Sharpe was simply the name THOMAS
SHARPE, or T. SHARPE, impressed in the ware. That of the
present firm is the monogram S. B. and Co. within a wreath of oak and
ivy, and the words SHARPE’S PATENT, as here engraved.

  [Illustration: SHARPES PATENT

  SB

  Fig. 141.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Swadlincote Pottery._--These works were established in 1790 by
the late Mr. John Hunt, of Swadlincote, and were, after his death,
continued by Mr. Thomas Woodward, whose son, Mr. James Woodward, is
their present proprietor. They were at first small, but being the first
of the kind in the place soon got into repute, and fire bricks were
constantly being fetched by cart to Leicester, Derby, Wirksworth, &c.
Fire bricks, fire clay, for Sheffield steel works crucibles, and iron
furnaces, were the sole productions till 1859, when the manufacture
of sewage pipes, terra-cotta chimney-pots, vases, &c., was added, and
since then marble, white, and cane-coloured sanitary earthenware has
been introduced, and is largely made. In this department lavatory
and closet fittings of every variety are produced. Some of the
constructions are peculiar to these works, and are--especially the
patent “Wash-out” arrangement,--in high repute. Majolica and Rockingham
ware are also largely made. The mark adopted by Mr. Woodward is “the
anchor, with a portion of cable twisted round it, forming a monogram of
J. W.,” as engraved on Fig. 142.

  [Illustration: TRADE MARK

  Fig. 142.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Swadlincote Mills._--Established by Moses Cartwright about 1837,
but now carried on by Mr. Edward Grice, who produces all the usual
sanitary and terra-cotta goods of the district.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Waterloo Pottery._--This pottery was established by Messrs. Robinson
and Rowley in 1815, and has been successively worked since their time
by Mr. Robinson alone, Mr. James Staley, and Messrs. Staley Brothers.
From these last the works passed in 1875 to Messrs. Mason and Adcock,
the present proprietors. They produce, extensively, all the usual
descriptions of Derbyshire cane ware, yellow ironstone, and buff,
Rockingham, and mottled wares. No mark is used.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Old Midway Pottery._--Established many years ago by a Mr. Granger,
these works passed from him to Mr. Richard Staley, sen., and they
are now carried on by Messrs. Richard Staley, John Staley, and John
Brookes, under the style of “Richard Staley and Sons.” The operations
of the firm are confined to Derbyshire fire-proof cane ware, Rockingham
ware, and buff ware; and in these they produce all the usual domestic
and other articles. The mark is the name, with the word “Fireproof”
added upon dishes, &c.


                            CHURCH GRESLEY.

_Church Gresley Pottery._--These works were originally built about the
year 1790, by a Mr. Leedham, for the purpose of manufacturing coarse
ware wash-pans. About 1816 Mr. W. Bourne bought the works, enlarged
them, and commenced the manufacture of Derbyshire ironstone cane ware,
which has been made here ever since. Since Mr. Bourne’s time the works
have been carried on successively by Mr. Edwards (see Burton-on-Trent),
Messrs. Shaw and Harrison, and Mr. Henry Wileman, at whose decease in
1864 they were taken by Mr. T. G. Green, the present proprietor.

Cane-coloured ironstone, Rockingham, mottled, black lustre, buff, and
other wares are made; and at an adjoining manufactory, built by Mr.
Green in 1871, ordinary earthenware, painted, lined, sponged, and cream
colour, and other wares are made in all the usual services and domestic
articles. Mr. Green has taken out patents for a process of moulding
earthenware, and for a bat-making machine.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Commonside Pottery._--These works are of old establishment. At first
the commonest description of earthenware was made, and afterwards Mr.
Edward Grice carried them on for the manufacture of sanitary goods and
chimney-pots. From him they passed, in 1873, into the hands of Messrs.
Mason, Gough, and Till. In 1874 Mr. Mason left the firm, and the style
since then has been “Till and Gough.” Yellow, Rockingham, and buff
wares are made of the usual quality, and in the same general variety of
articles, as in the other Derbyshire potteries. No mark is used.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Commonside Works._--Mr. Edward Grice, who, after leaving the above,
established these works in 1867, manufactures sanitary and terra-cotta
goods of various kinds.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Hill Top Works._--These were established in 1810, by Mr. John
Cooper, who was afterwards joined in partnership by Mr. Massey, and
afterwards by Mr. Banks, the firms being successively “John Cooper,”
“Cooper and Massey,” and “Cooper and Banks.” They next belonged to
Mr. Henry Ansell. The sole proprietor now is Mr. Nehemiah Banks. The
wares produced are the ordinary “Derbyshire Ironstone Cane Ware,”
buff ware, Rockingham ware, and black lustre ware. In these all the
usual household articles are produced in large quantities for home and
foreign markets. Horticultural ware is also largely made; the garden,
sea-kale, and other pots, and seed-pans, &c., being of superior quality.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Hillside Works._--These are devoted to the manufacture of fire-clay
goods.

       *       *       *       *       *

Other manufactories in the district are Mr. R. Quinton’s brown ware and
stone-bottle works; Mr. E. Jones’s pancheon and flower-pot works, and
the works of Mr. W. Cotterell.

About 1846, Mr William Edwards, formerly of Derby, and later of
Burton-on-Trent, commenced a yellow-ware manufactory at Ashby
Holes, Gresley Common, which he carried on for a few years. (See
Burton-on-Trent.)


          WOODVILLE, OR WOODEN BOX, HARTSHORNE, GRESLEY, &C.

Woodville, the modern and more euphonious name given to the village
of “Wooden Box,” is five and a half miles from Burton-on-Trent. The
original name arose from an old wooden “box,” or hut, which formerly
stood on the site of the present toll-house, where a man used to sit
to collect toll, but which was afterwards burned down. The original
“box,” it may be added, was an old port-wine butt, from Drakelow Hall,
and in this the collector, Diogenes-like, spent his days. In 1800 only
two houses existed here, the “Butt House,” belonging to the then Earl
Ferrars and the residence of his son Lord Tamworth, and a farmhouse.
On this farm some valuable beds of clay were found to exist, and a
Mr. Peake, from the Staffordshire pottery district, established a
small manufactory on the spot. From this manufactory the trade of the
district has entirely taken its rise, and it is now noted for extensive
manufactories of Derbyshire ironstone ware; cane-coloured, Rockingham,
black, buff, and brown wares; sanitary goods, terra-cotta, &c. Its
inhabitants are principally potters and colliers, and it has risen
to the importance of being a parish of itself--part of the parish of
Hartshorne, in Derbyshire, and of Ashby-de-la-Zouch, in Leicestershire,
being taken for the purpose--the main, or High, street separating those
two counties. Near Woodville is the modern hamlet of Albert village,
and it has a branch-line on the Midland Railway.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Hartshorne Potteries_ were established in 1818 by Mr. Joseph
Thompson, the father of the present proprietors, Richard and Willoughby
Thompson, who now trade under the style of “Thompson Brothers.” The
goods made by this firm are Derbyshire ironstone-ware, brown stoneware,
cane ironstone ware, buff stoneware, yellow ironstone ware (enamelled
white inside), and black and Rockingham wares, and terra-cotta goods.
Sanitary and drain-pipes, flooring and other tiles, fire-bricks and
building bricks, &c., are also produced. The former mark of this
pottery was--

    J THOMPSON

    or

    JOSEPH THOMPSON
    _WOODEN BOX
    POTTERY_
    DERBYSHIRE

       *       *       *       *       *

_Hartshorne Pottery._--These works were established about 1790 by
James Onions, who was succeeded by Luke Copeland. The works were next
carried on by Messrs. Read, Malkin and Co., and afterwards by Read and
Malkin only, and next by G. S. Read alone, who continued proprietor for
thirty or forty years. Mr. Read died in January, 1860, and in March
of the same year the concern passed into the hands of its present
owner, Mr. J. B. Rowley. The goods produced are “Derbyshire Ironstone”
or cane-coloured ware, Rockingham ware, Mottled ware, Buff ware, and
Black Lustre ware of the usual quality and character. In these, bowls
of various kinds, jugs of all descriptions, jars, dishes, tea and
coffee-pots, mugs, and almost every article for domestic use, are
extensively made.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Woodville Tile Works._--At these works, established by Messrs. Barry
and Co., sanitary goods and geometric and other tiles are made. The
tiles are “encaustic, mosaic, geometrical, and white-glazed tiles for
baths, &c.,” of average quality. In terra-cotta, vases, chimney-tops,
and other ornamental goods are produced, as are also fire-backs for
stoves, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Woodville Pottery._--This manufactory was established in 1833 (in
which year it was built) by Messrs. Thomas Hall and William Davenport,
both of whom are now deceased. In 1858 the works passed into the hands
of Messrs. Thomas Betteridge and Thomas Nadin. In 1863 Mr. Nadin
retired from the concern, which, from that time to the present, has
been carried on solely by Mr. Thomas Betteridge. The goods produced are
the usual classes of Derbyshire cane-coloured ironstone, Rockingham,
mottled, and buff wares of the district. In these all the ordinary
articles--jugs, tea and coffee-pots, dishes and bowls, jars, and other
domestic vessels--are made in considerable quantities. The quality is
that of the entire district.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Albion Works._--The Albion Fire Clay Works, established by the present
proprietors, Messrs. Hosea Tugby & Co., produce all the usual fire-clay
goods, bricks, tiles, &c. The firm have patented a “continuous direct
action kiln.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_Woodville Potteries._--These works were established about 1810 by
the late Mr. Watts, who was joined in partnership by his relative, Mr.
Cash, and it has remained in the same family to the present day. The
present proprietors are Mr. William Cash and his son Mr. Thomas Cash,
who still trade under the style of “Watts and Cash.” The productions
of this pottery are the Derbyshire “ironstone” or “yellow” ware,
buff-coloured ware, Rockingham ware, &c., of the ordinary qualities,
in which all the usual varieties of domestic vessels, services, &c.,
are largely manufactured, principally for the American and other
foreign markets. The local clay from which these goods are produced “is
peculiar to this district, and is not found precisely the same anywhere
else;” it was not brought into use for ceramic purposes until the
establishment of these works.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Rawdon Pottery_ was built by the fourth Marquess of Hastings,
on whose estate it was situate, and was first worked by John Hall, who
was succeeded, on his failure, by John Brunt, who carried it on until
his death. He was succeeded by his son, Mr. Thomas Brunt, who, however,
did not succeed in the business, and in 1861 the works passed into
the hands of the present proprietors, Messrs. Smith, Dooley, and Co.
The goods produced are the usual varieties of articles in “Derbyshire
Ironstone,” or cane-coloured ware, Rockingham ware, buff ware, and
cream-coloured ware.

       *       *       *       *       *

The “_Pool Works_” for terra-cotta fire-bricks and sanitary tubes, at
Woodville, near Burton-on-Trent, were established about the year 1830,
by the late Mr. Joseph Walker Bourne, yellow earthenware manufacturer,
of Church Gresley, who purchased the property of the late Sir Roger
Gresley, Bart., of Drakelow Hall, Derbyshire, and established the
works for the manufacture, on a small scale, of fire-bricks for his
earthenware manufactory. After the death of Mr. Bourne, in 1840, the
present proprietor, Mr. Edward Ensor, then of Lyme Regis, Dorsetshire,
purchased the business, and the year following sent his second son,
Henry Loader Ensor, at the age of fourteen years, to learn, and
eventually manage, the business. At that time the works consisted of
a 4-horse power condensing engine to grind and prepare the fire-clay;
two small hovels or sheds, and two small brick-kilns, covering an
extent of 4,000 yards, the whole make not exceeding 20,000 bricks per
week, and only seven men and six boys being employed. The market for
the bricks was the local earthenware manufactories and collieries, and
a few towns in the immediate neighbourhood; the bricks being carted
to the Ashby and Burton Canals. About that time, the clay being found
suitable for making crucibles for steel refiners at Sheffield, their
manufacture was introduced into that market, and has gradually grown
into a very important branch of the trade of the district. In 1845 Mr.
Ensor, senr., came to live in his present residence, Gresley Cottage,
and took the active management of the business. In 1846 the Midland
Railway opened the line from Burton to Leicester, with branches to
Woodville and Swadlincote, thus opening up a means of cheaper transit
for the valuable productions of the neighbourhood. From this time the
different manufactories and collieries greatly increased, and other
branches of the trade were started, such as salt-glazed sanitary pipes
and terra-cotta chimney-tops, &c. About 1850 Mr. Ensor purchased the
Pool property from Mr. Mammatt, and soon after this his eldest son,
Edward, having returned from South Africa, took part in the management
of the business. In 1864, Mr. Ensor having seen the Hoffman Patent
Brick Kiln at Wakefield, and being struck with the saving of fuel
effected in burning common bricks, purchased the right of the sole use
of the patent in this district, and erected kilns, drying-sheds, &c.,
intending to burn all his goods by this system, but found it essential
to introduce many improvements and alterations, as the Hoffman system,
although well adapted for common red bricks (which require little
heat), was not adapted to fire-brick and terra-cotta, which requires
very great heat. Mr. Ensor succeeded in inventing a process by which
he retained the heat so effectively that 3 cwt. of small coal more
successfully burnt 1,000 bricks than 20 cwt. of good rough coal did in
the most approved old-fashioned kilns. At this time, _i.e._ in 1865,
the works consisted of four high-pressure engines for grinding and
preparing the clay for the different branches of the manufactory. The
machinery for grinding the fire-clay was two pairs of iron rollers and
pug mill; that for the terra-cotta clay was different, and consisted
of edge runners of great weight revolving in an iron pan, to reduce
the clay into a fine powder before passing through sieves and the
pug mill. At this time Carr’s “Patent Disintegrator,” for mixing and
reducing manures, &c., was seen by Mr. Ensor, to whom it occurred it
might be adapted to this process, and he erected one, adding to it
many improvements, and eventually so constructed it that it is now the
most valuable clay reducer ever used. The machine is circular, made
of iron, and consists of four rows of bars, each running in opposite
directions at the speed of 400 revolutions per minute; the clay being
put in the centre, is forced out through the bars, thus reducing it
into the finest powder, and pulverising from 50 to 150 tons in a day
of 10 hours, according to the texture of the clay. About 1868, through
an itinerant firebrand causing a strike amongst the colliers of the
district, and thus almost stopping the different trades of the district
through want of coal, and its consequent high price, experiments were
tried by Edward Ensor, jun., who ultimately patented “a process for
an improved system of burning all kinds of earthenware, salt-glazed,
sanitary, and terra-cotta goods, fire, blue, and common bricks,
tiles, &c., lime, and other commodities.” A kiln on this principle
was erected, and has been a perfect success, and is still in use at
these works for burning salt-glazed sanitary goods, and at several
other manufactories for bricks, in each case effecting a saving of
75 per cent. in fuel and in labour. The works at the present time
occupy an area of 40,000 yards, and employ about 290 persons. Another
patent adopted at these works is the “Patent Wire Rope Tramway” for
conveying any material any distance up to one mile over hilly or broken
ground; which has been so improved as to be made to drain the pits
of water by pumping, hoisting the clay out of the pits from a depth
of about 20 yards to the surface, and conveying it to the machinery
for making up into bricks, and to the railway for conveyance to the
different steel-melting districts. The fire-bricks made here are sent
to every quarter of the globe, being largely used by Government on
colonial military stations in the erection of cooking-ranges, ovens,
and boilers; and for sugar refineries in China and the East, as well as
for glass, earthenware, gas, iron and steel works in our own country.
Fire-place backs are also extensively made. The salt-glazed sanitary
goods are of excellent and durable quality, and, being highly vitrified
in the body, are capable of withstanding the action of the acids in
sewage, &c. In terra-cotta, the only art-branch carried on at the Pool
Works, vases, tazzas, pedestals, brackets, trusses, and ornamental
bricks are produced, many of which are of very good design; the colour
is a light stone.

The beds of clay on this property are as follows:--The principal, or
fire-clay, found at a depth of from 10 to 30 yards, is a bed of about
6 feet in thickness, “and is proved to be equal to any bed in the
kingdom.” There are also valuable beds of clay for terra-cotta and
salt-glazed ware, both above and below the fire-clay: these consist
of, first, common marl, generally blue in colour, from 2 to 4 yards in
thickness (this is intermixed with small ironstones, round and oval in
form); then a thin bed of clunch; next a thin vein of coal or smut,
about a foot in thickness, but of little value; then another bed of
marl, from 3 to 5 feet, with small pieces of ironstone intermixed,
generally kidney-shaped; then the fire-clay, 6 feet; next 1 foot of
smut or coal; then a bed of clay called “bottle clay,” good for brown
earthenware, of similar character to the Chesterfield and Denby ware,
but used by the firm for pipes, from 6 to 9 feet in thickness; then
a very hard light-coloured clay, full of silica, which is used for
terra-cotta, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Woodville._--Messrs. Barry & Co. manufacture all the usual varieties
of glazed stoneware sewerage and drain-pipes.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Wooden Box Pottery._--This manufactory was established by Mr. Thomas
Hallam in 1817. Since his time it has been successively worked by
Mr. Robinson, Messrs. Harrison and Cash, Messrs. Hallam & Co., and
Messrs. Watts and Cash. Its present proprietor is Mr. Thomas Nadin, who
manufactures ironstone, cane, buff, and Rockingham wares of the usual
kinds and qualities as the other Derbyshire manufactories. No mark is
used.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Mount Pleasant Works._--In 1847 the late Mr. John Knowles, of Matlock,
established these works for the manufacture of bricks, tiles, fire-clay
goods, and terra cotta. These he continued till his death in 1869, when
they were carried on by Mrs. Knowles, his widow, till 1871; since that
time they have been continued by the trustees of Mrs. Knowles, under
the style of “John Knowles & Co.” Besides all the usual classes of
bricks, tiles, stove-backs, garden edgings, salt-glazed sanitary and
drain-pipes, &c., some highly ornate chimney-tops, and garden vases of
good design are made. The firm are also proprietors of crucible and
cement fire clays.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Coleorton Pottery._--Established in 1835 by Messrs. Wilson, Lount,
and Proudman. On the retiring of the latter partners, the works were
carried on by Mr. Thomas Wilson alone, and so continue. The productions
are yellow, buff or cane, and Rockingham wares, in which all the usual
domestic articles are made. The ware is of more than average excellence
in quality. The “buff” is made of a mixture of Devonshire china clay
and the local clay found close by the works, from which the yellow ware
is made; it is found about nine yards below the surface, underlying a
seam of coal. The London and other home markets are supplied. No mark
is used.




                              CHAPTER V.

   Stoke-upon-Trent--Josiah Spode--Copeland and Garratt--Copeland
   and Sons--Mintons--Hollins--Trent Pottery; Jones--Albert
   Street Works--Copeland Street Works--Glebe Street and Wharf
   Street Works--Copeland Street--Bridge Works--London Road;
   Goss--Kirkham--Campbell Brick and Tile Company--Harrison and
   Wedgwood--Bankes--Hugh Booth--Ephraim Booth--Wolf--Bird--Adams
   and Son--H. and R. Daniel--Boyle--Reade--Lowndes and Hall.


The large and commercially important, as well as thickly populated
district, known as the “Staffordshire Potteries,” or more commonly
called simply “The Potteries,” comprises a number of towns known
as the “Pottery Towns,” and other places adjoining them. These are
Burslem, Hanley, Shelton, Tunstall, Stoke-upon-Trent, Longton, Etruria,
Cobridge, Fenton, Longport, and Dresden. Of these, Stoke-upon-Trent,
although far from being the oldest, or largest, or busiest, is
the great railway centre, and head of the electoral district; the
parliamentary district of Stoke-upon-Trent (which returns two
members to Parliament) comprising these towns just named, with a
few other out-lying places. Some of these towns are corporate, and
Newcastle-under-Lyme is both a corporate and parliamentary borough. It
is estimated that in this pottery district considerably over thirty
thousand persons are employed in, or dependent on, the staple trade of
the place, that of china and earthenware manufacture.


                           STOKE-UPON-TRENT.

_Spode._--_Copeland._--The first notice of the name of Spode that I
have met with in connection with potting is an entry of the “hiring” of
Josiah Spode by Thomas Whieldon, in 1749. This I was the first to make
public from the original book of Whieldon’s accounts in my possession.
It is as follows:--

      1749.                                                £ _s._ _d._
    April 9. Hired Siah Spoade, to give him from this
                time to Martelmas next 2_s._ 3_d._, or
                2_s._ 6_d._ if he Deserves it.
               2d year                                     0  2    9
               3d year                                     0  3    3
               Pd. full earnest                            0  1    0

This entry is of considerable historical interest, as being the first
hiring of Josiah Spode, who, being born in 1733, would at that time
be sixteen years of age, and was the founder of the family which
subsequently rose to such eminence in the art. The “hiring” being for
three years, and at wages ranging from 2_s._ 3_d._ to 3_s._ 3_d._ per
week, while other men at the same time were being paid from 5_s._ 3_d._
to 7_s._ per week, would appear to have been a kind of apprenticeship,
or, at all events, a “finishing touch” to the learning of the trade.
From April till Martinmas, which is the great time for all hirings in
the pottery trade, the payment was to be at 2_s._ 3_d._ per week, “or
2_s._ 6_d._ if he deserves it,” with the prospect of a rise of sixpence
per week in successive years. He appears to have fully worked out his
time, and to have been found deserving. Two other entries in the same
book, showing successive hirings, after the expiration of the first
term of three years, are as follows:--

      1752.                                                £  _s._ _d._
    Feby. 22. Hired Josiah Spoad for next Martlemas,
                per week                                   0   7    0
              I am to give him earn.                       0   5    0
              Pd. in Part.                                 0   1    0
              Pd. do.                                      0   4    0

      1754.
    Feby. 25. Hired Siah Spode, per week.                  0   7    6
              Earnest.                                     1  11    6
              Pd. in part.                                 0  16    0

Thus in 1752 he got 7_s._ a week, and an earnest of 5_s._; and in
the following year he was raised to 7_s._ 6_d._ per week, with the
unusually high earnest of £1 11_s._ 6_d._ At this time he must have
been married, for in the same year, 1754, it appears the second Josiah
Spode was born. But little is known of the early life of this second
Josiah Spode; the probability, however, is that his father, after
leaving Whieldon’s service, commenced a small manufactory on his
own account, and that he learned the business with him. About 1770,
Spode (the son at that time being about sixteen years old) is stated
to have taken the works at Stoke, previously carried on by Messrs.
Turner, or Turner and Banks. He is said also to have introduced, about
1784, transfer printing into Stoke. Previous to this time Mr. William
Copeland, of London (a native of Stoke), who travelled in the tea
trade, made the acquaintance of Mr. Spode and offered to undertake
a commission to sell his tea ware and other goods to his customers.
The enterprise was very successful, and a warehouse was taken in Fore
Street, Cripplegate, London, for the general sale of Spode’s goods.
Trade increasing rapidly, Mr. Copeland, who became a partner with
Mr. Spode, afterwards, in 1779, purchased the property, 37, Lincoln’s
Inn Fields, and, at the back, in Portugal Street, opened an immense
depot for the sale of pottery goods, in the place where stood the
theatre (originally built by D’Avenant in 1662, and rebuilt by Rich
in 1714), famous as being the house in which Garrick first appeared;
the original Joe Miller flashed out his witticisms; and where the
_Recruiting Officer_, the _Beggars’ Opera_, &c., were first produced.
This establishment was managed by Mr. Copeland; the manufactory being
conducted entirely by Mr. Spode. Mr. Spode’s son, who was ultimately
taken into partnership with his father, was for a time in the London
house, but on the death of the latter, in 1797, he returned to Stoke,
and devoted himself to the manufactory. In 1800 Mr. Spode commenced
making porcelain in addition to earthenware, and was the first to
introduce felspar into its composition. In 1805 he introduced an opaque
porcelain, known as “ironstone china,” which he manufactured to a very
large extent, and exported in immense quantities to France and other
countries. In 1806 H.R.H. the Prince of Wales visited the works, and
Mr. Spode was appointed potter to him. The porcelain, the ironstone
china, and the ordinary earthenware manufactured at this time were of
the very highest character, both in body, in glaze, and in decoration;
indeed, in all three of these respects they rank with the best of the
period.

The first partnership was Spode and Copeland,[39] and next, Spode,
Son, and Copeland. After the death of the elder Spode it again became
Spode and Copeland, and next, on the son of the latter, who was
afterwards alderman, being taken into partnership, Spode, Copeland,
and Son, and was so carried on until the elder Mr. Copeland’s death,
in 1826. In 1827 the second Mr. Spode died, and was succeeded by his
son, the third Josiah Spode, who, however, only survived his father
two years, and died in 1829. Until 1833 the business was carried on by
the executors of the third Josiah Spode, of Hawksyard (his only son,
also named Josiah, being a minor), and Mr. Alderman Copeland. In that
year the entire concern was purchased by Mr. Alderman William Taylor
Copeland, who shortly afterwards took into partnership his principal
traveller and town correspondent, Mr. Thomas Garrett. The firm then
became “Copeland and Garrett,” and was so continued until 1847, when a
dissolution took place. From that time till 1867 the style of the firm
remained simply “W. T. Copeland, late Spode.” In that year Mr. Copeland
took his four sons into partnership, and from that time to the present
the firm has continued under the name of “W. T. Copeland and Sons.”

  [Illustration: Figs. 145 to 149.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 150.]

Mr. Alderman Copeland was Lord Mayor of London in 1835–6. He sat
as member of Parliament for Coleraine from 1828 till 1832, and for
Stoke-upon-Trent from 1837 till 1852. Losing his seat in that year,
Mr. Copeland was re-elected in 1857 and sat till 1865, when he retired
from the representation. He was the grandson of Mr. William Copeland,
yeoman, of the Holly Bush, in the parish of Stoke-upon-Trent, and
son of the partner of the first Mr. Spode. The will of Mr. William
Copeland, of Holly Bush, was dated November 10th, 1775, and proved
December 28th, 1786. A daughter named Hannah, mentioned in that
document, became the wife of the late Mr. William Astbury, of the
family whose name is intimately mixed up with the history of the
pottery of the district. Mr. Alderman Copeland died in 1868.

  [Illustration: Figs. 151 to 155.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 156 to 159.--Messrs. Copeland’s
  Productions.]

Of the productions of the present firm it is manifestly impossible to
give even a brief _resumé_; the bare enumeration of the different
articles in porcelain and earthenware would occupy many closely printed
pages. It will only be possible to note, here and there, one of their
art-productions. For services, both breakfast, dinner, dessert, tea,
and toilet, the firm ranks among the very highest in order, and these
are produced both in china and in earthenware, and every variety of
ornamentation; in the former from the simple gold or coloured lines
and borders, and in the latter from the commonest sponged patterns, to
the most profuse and lavish relief and painting. One of their highest
efforts, and deservedly so, in the way of services, is the dessert
service made especially for H.R.H. the Prince of Wales, in 1866, which
is one of the greatest triumphs of ceramic art yet achieved. The
service consists of 198 pieces, comprising a centre, eight compotiers,
two cream-bowls, two ice-pails, twelve sweetmeat compotiers,
seventy-two cups and saucers, and fifty plates. The commission was
given shortly before the Prince’s marriage, and hence, as all the
decorations are floral, the orange blossom was allowed to become a
prominent object in each group; and it would be impossible to conceive
flowers more exquisitely painted than they are; they were painted
by Mr. Hürten and others. The centre piece is a double _assiette
montée_, the principal compartment being supported by seated figures
representing the four quarters of the globe, and each bearing an
appropriate symbol. These were the work of Joseph Durham, R.A., and are
miniature reproductions of those which support the statue of “Albert
the Good,” in the Royal Horticultural Society’s Gardens. The four
raised fruit-dishes are elevated upon groups of three figures each,
typical of the twelve months of the year, admirably modelled by Mr. F.
Miller. The four smaller ones, by Mr. G. Halse, equally well typify
the elements, earth, air, fire, and water. The plates, as well as the
pieces I have named, are of the purest porcelain, and are exquisitely
and elaborately perforated. They are divided into panels of fruit and
flowers, surrounded by ribbons and festoons in raised and chased gold,
and in the centre of each is the monogram of the Prince and Princess
of Wales. There are no two pieces alike, although all harmonize well
together.

Three pieces of this beautiful royal service, the centre, one of
the compotiers, and a cream-bowl, are engraved, Figs. 150, 156, and
159, and will show better than any description can the high class of
art-workmanship which they exhibit.

  [Illustration: Figs. 160 to 163.--Messrs. Copeland’s Vases.]

One of the greatest improvements in ordinary earthenware which has
been effected by this eminent firm, who have always exercised a
laudable desire to keep pace with, or to be leaders of, the improved
Art-taste of the age, is the production of what they appropriately term
an “Ivory-tinted body.” In this kind of ware they produce table,
dessert, and toilet services of every conceivable design, and of
various degrees of decoration. In the dinner and dessert services the
delicate, soft, warm tone of the ivory tint is peculiarly grateful to
the eye, and has a charming effect when “set” out on the white linen
cloth. The tone of colour which Messrs. Copeland have succeeded in
producing has all the softness of the finest examples of old Wedgwood
cream-coloured ware, but without its somewhat harsh yellowness. Nothing
could be less grating to the eye of taste than this soft tint, and
doubtless in many homes of taste the warm “ivory body” will take the
place of the cold white of the general classes of earthenware. It only
remains to say that in that peculiar body every variety of pattern,
from the rich old Spode with its Eastern brilliant combinations of
gold and rich patches of colour, down to the most ordinary painted
borders, are made. One service which has particularly struck us as
beyond average in excellence is the “Stork.” Those examples in which
the pattern is in relief, and heightened in gold, are peculiarly rich
and good. The shape of the tureens and vegetable-dishes are of great
elegance and beauty. The ivory body is one of the greatest achievements
of the period.

  [Illustration: Figs. 164 and 165.]

In porcelain, vases, tazzas, bottles, and other articles of every
conceivable form, and decorated in an endless variety of ways both
in painting, in alto-relievo figures and flowers, and in massive
jewelling, gilding, and enamelling, are produced, and are of the most
costly and elegant character. Services, both of the most sumptuous and
severely simple character, are also produced in every style of art, and
on every scale of cost.

And here it becomes necessary to say a word as to some of the
achievements in colour of this firm. Of these, a new turquoise (which
Messrs. Copeland have christened “Cerulean blue”) is the richest and
fullest produced, and is remarkable for its brilliant intensity; the
Sardinian green is also very good, and the vermilion finer and more
rich than has at any time, or in any place, so far as my experience
goes, been produced. This is especially apparent upon a Japanese
dessert plate, where the decorations are upon pure enamel, requiring
a very high degree of heat, and where the colours come out more
brilliantly than on any other examples I have seen. On this plate,
which is a _chef-d’œuvre_ of Messrs. Copelands’ art, the border
is purely Japanese, and the centre essentially English, but all
equally perfect and equally beautiful; it is, in fact, an original and
brilliant conception, true to the spirit and principles of Japanese
design, but in no respect a copy of any of the productions of the
artists of that nation. The birds are exquisitely painted by Weaver,
one of the best painters of this class, and the remainder by artists of
equal celebrity in their several walks of decoration.

The “Satsuma ware” produced by Messrs. Copeland is of the most
exquisite beauty, and of rare excellence both in the matchless quality
of the body, the peculiarly waxy and very lovely surface of the glaze,
the pure taste which characterises its decoration, and admirable
manipulation apparent in each piece. In this ware, as in others
produced by the firm, it is a literal truism to say “perfection can no
farther go!” Vases and other decorative articles are produced in this
Satsuma ware, and take rank with the finest productions of any age or
any country.

Messrs. Copeland and Son are large producers of plain, and painted, and
enamelled tiles for internal decoration, and these, from the excellence
they have attained in the “body,” and the skill displayed in design
and in ornamentation, have become a speciality of the firm. They are
produced in endless variety, and for every purpose, but one of the most
striking and attractive novelties in this kind of mural decoration,
is that of a continuous design for a whole room, as first attempted
by them for Mr. Macfarlane. Of this speciality, I gave the following
notice in the _Art Journal_ for December, 1875:--

   “One of the most pleasing, and, at the same time, novel
   and effective, adaptations of fictile art to internal
   mural decoration yet attempted, has just been successfully
   accomplished by Messrs. Copeland and Sons, of Stoke-upon-Trent.
   To this, having been favoured with a private view of the
   decorations, we desire to draw attention. The lining of entire
   rooms with wall-tiles is, of course, no new thing, but has
   been repeatedly done, and in a variety of styles, by different
   firms and at different periods; but it has been left to Messrs.
   Copeland to strike out an entirely new idea in the mode of
   treatment. Mr. Macfarlane, whose Art-productions in metal we
   have often commended in the pages of the _Art Journal_, has
   recently erected in Glasgow a magnificent mansion, which,
   as might be expected from a man of such extensive knowledge
   and such pure taste, will enshrine many works of high-class
   examples in various walks of Art. In several of the apartments
   of this mansion--the billiard and bathrooms, for instance--Mr.
   Macfarlane desired to introduce some new feature which should,
   if possible, inaugurate what might with propriety be called a
   nineteenth-century style of decoration. He therefore wisely
   consulted Messrs. Copeland, who, acting on his idea, prepared
   a series of designs which, while adhering faithfully to the
   classic laws of Art, were, both in subject and in treatment,
   strictly characteristic of the present day. The general design
   is a terra-cotta dado of full Indian red tone of colour, walls
   of pale celadon tint, and a frieze painted in monochrome, in
   continuous subjects apposite to the uses of the various rooms,
   which are thus covered with tiles, in one grand design, from
   floor to ceiling. The walls between the dado and frieze are
   covered, as just stated, with celadon tiles placed diagonally,
   with the joints made just sufficiently apparent to give a
   geometrical break to the surface, and so remove what otherwise
   might be a sameness in appearance; while those of the frieze
   (which are of a pale yellow-ground colour, well adapted for
   throwing out the figures, and which, when the room is lit up,
   disappears, and gives the effect of a luminous sky to the
   pictures) are placed horizontally, and their edges fitted
   with such mathematical precision and nicety that their joints
   are invisible. The whole of the tiles have a dead, or purely
   _fresco_ surface, and are most perfect for the purpose for
   which they are intended; and from their peculiar hardness and
   other characteristics--the result of much anxious thought and
   experiment--are perfectly impervious to the action of damp, and
   cannot fail to be permanent.

   “The frieze (three feet in height) of the billiard-room
   represents, in four separate groupings on the four sides of
   the apartment, the sports of the British race; one side being
   devoted to ‘Health,’ in which youthful games conducing to that
   essential, from infancy, with its doll and other playthings, to
   boyhood and youthhood, with hoop, cricket, skating, curling,
   snowballing, and so on; another to ‘Strength,’ with its central
   allegorical figure and groups representing pole-leaping,
   shot-throwing, wrestling, football, hockey, boxing, &c.; a
   third to ‘Courage,’ a central allegorical figure supported by
   genii, the one proclaiming, and the other crowning, deeds of
   heroism in the army, in saving lives from shipwreck, fire, and
   other casualties, and the wild sports of our Eastern empire
   and North American colonies; and the fourth to ‘Fortitude,’
   in which the central group surrounding the allegorical figure
   is composed of lifelike portraits of such men as Livingstone,
   Burton, McClintock, Layard, and others; the remaining portions
   showing athletes contesting in a foot-race, and crews in a
   boat-race. The friezes of this room, painted in monochrome, are
   the work of Mr. R. J. Abraham (son of the Art-director of the
   works), who recently won the Art-Union prize, and is a gold
   medallist, and Mr. Besche, a skilful artist, whose works are
   in high repute. The frieze of the heating-room of the Turkish
   baths, which is lined in a precisely similar style to the
   other, is entirely composed of tropical plants and flowers,
   arranged in a masterly and effective manner, and painted, even
   to the most minute detail, with consummate skill and with true
   artistic feeling. This frieze, which is painted in sepia with
   its fullest and best effect, is entirely the work of Mr. Hürten,
   and is a worthy example of his pencil both in arrangement and in
   treatment. The whole of the plants represented are, without an
   exception, studies from nature, sketched and arranged for this
   special purpose from the plants themselves in the magnificent
   conservatories of the Duke of Devonshire at Chatsworth; and they
   are in each individual instance reproduced with pre-Raphaelite
   accuracy and precision.

   “The friezes are masterpieces of Art as well as of manipulative
   skill. They reflect the highest credit on Messrs. Copeland
   and their Art-director, Mr. Abraham, by whom they have been
   produced, and who have thus inaugurated a new, and what we
   pronounce to be a successful style, of internal decoration--one
   that is sure to be followed in many a mansion and home of taste
   in our country and abroad. Mr. Macfarlane will have reason to be
   proud of his acquisition, and has the satisfaction of feeling,
   that with the aid of Messrs. Copeland and their skilled staff of
   artists, he has originated a novel feature in Art-decoration,
   and carried it to an enviably successful issue. Messrs. Copeland
   are renowned for the excellence of their work and for the true
   artistic feeling and skill which characterise everything that
   passes from their hands, and their present productions will, if
   that be possible, add to their celebrity.”

Tiles for flower-boxes, lily-pans, garden-seats, slabs for
chimney-pieces, table-tops, fire-places, &c., and for every other
purpose, as well as door-plates, are also largely produced and highly
decorated.

In Parian--the next best material to marble--statuary and busts,
as well as other objects, are extensively made. This is another
speciality of the firm, and one the discovery of which belongs to
them. It is, in fact, the development of the old and ever-famous
Derby biscuit ware,[40] rendered finer and more commercially, as well
as artistically, available by the careful attention of the Messrs.
Copeland. It was introduced by them about 1846, and is said to have
been then made at the suggestion of Gibson the sculptor; from that time
to the present it has been extensively manufactured by every house--by
Copeland’s, perhaps, more extensively than any other. Among the more
recent of their finest works in Parian, are the “Infancy of Jupiter,”
“Lady Godiva,” “Nora Creina,” the “Flute-player,” the “Reading Girl,”
busts of “A Mother” and of “Love,” all by Monti; “Young England” and
“Young England’s Sister,” a very charming pair by Halse; a “Shepherd
Boy,” “Spring,” and “Summer,” by L. A. Malampre; and “Master Tom” and
“On the Sea-Shore,” by Joseph Durham, R.A. Among their other special
works, Foley’s “Ino and Bacchus,” Durham’s “Chastity” and “Santa
Filomena,” Monti’s “Night” and “Morning,” and a score or two others,
are brilliant examples. Besides figures, groups, and busts, a large
number of other beautiful objects of various kinds are produced in
Parian.

  [Illustration: Figs. 166 to 168.--Copeland’s Parian Figures.]

The more ordinary classes of goods for general use and consumption are
all of good quality, whether produced in the ordinary earthenware,
the stoneware, or any other kind of body, and in all these classes
Messrs. Copeland are very large producers. Their “crown ware” has so
good a body as to stand the heat of the hard kiln, and thus to take the
richest tints of crimson, &c. The ship fittings--the _Atlantic_
washtop slab especially--are considered to be among the best produced.
It ought also to be added, that Messrs. Copeland were the first to
introduce those elegant and most convenient novelties, “Gordon Trays,”
which they produce in a variety of forms.

  [Illustration: Fig. 169 and 170.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 171.]

The principal artists employed are Hürten, who has attained, and
deservedly so, the distinction of being one of the best flower-painters
in Europe; Weaver, whose birds are equal to those of any other painter;
Besche, a figure and general painter of great power and excellence; and
Abraham, Junior (a gold medallist), a figure painter of much promise.
Besides these, a number of other talented artists are employed, and the
staff of enamellers, ground-layers, and gilders, includes some of the
best obtainable in each department. In these works, too, female talent
has been highly cultivated, many of the productions of the paintresses
evidencing pure feeling and cultivated taste. The whole is under the
control of Mr. R. F. Abraham, as Art-director of the establishment.
Mr. Abraham, who was formerly at Coalport with Mr. Rose, was a student
of Antwerp and Paris, and is a successful follower of the school of
Etty. The softness of touch, the purity and delicacy of feeling, and
the sunny mellowness of tone, as well as the chasteness of design and
correctness of drawing, produced on the best pieces of his productions,
show him to be a thorough artist, and place him high above most others
in this difficult art, while his intimate knowledge of all the phases
and intricacies of Art, and of all the processes of the manufacture,
render him peculiarly fitted for the post to which he has been called.

  [Illustration: Fig. 172.]

The marks successively used by this firm in its various changes are as
follows:--

  [Illustration: SPODE]

Sometimes impressed in the body, and at others pencilled on the glaze;
also SPODE in larger capital letters.

  [Illustration:

    SPODE
    Felspar Porcelain]

Also impressed, or painted, or printed on the ware.

  [Illustration:

    SPODE
    Stone-China

    or

    SPODE
    Stone-China

  Fig. 175 and 176.]

Printed in blue on the bottom of the goods of that description.

These, with immaterial variations in detail, were all printed on the
ware.

  [Illustration:

    SPODE

    _Spodes_
    NEW FAYENCE

    Spode’s
    Imperial

    Spode
    Filspar
    _Porcelain_

  Figs. 177 to 180.]

    SPODE, SON
    & COPELAND or SPODE & COPELAND, both impressed and printed.

  [Illustration:

    COPELAND & GARRETT
    LATE
    SPODE

    COPELAND & GARRETT
    LADE
    SPODE
    NEW FAYENCE

    COPELAND & GARRETT
    NEW
    BLANCHE

    COPELAND AND GARRETT

    COPELAND
    & GARRETT

  Figs. 181 to 186.]

  [Illustration:

    C & G
    with the name of
    the pattern.

    COPELAND & GARRETT
    LATE
    SPODE
    THE TIBER

    COPELAND & GARRETT
    + NEW +
    JAPAN STONE

    COPELAND & GARRETT
    NEW
    FAYENCE

  Figs. 187 to 190.]

All the above printed on the ware.

  [Illustration:

    COPELAND
    LATE SPODE.

    Copeland Late Spode

    COPELAND late SPODE.

    COPELAND
    LATE SPODE

    COPELAND

    COPELAND

    COPELAND PATENT JASPER

    COPELAND

    COPELAND
    STONE CHINA

    WT. COPELAND & SONS

    COPELAND

    COPELAND

    COPELAND
    B

  Figs. 191 to 203.]

The following are the dates when some of the most celebrated printed
patterns were first introduced:--“Castle,” 1806; “Roman,” 1811; “Turk,”
1813; “Milkmaid,” “Dagger-border,” “Tower,” “Peacock,” and “New
Temple,” 1814; “New Nankin,” “New Japan,” and “India,” 1815; “Italian”
and “Woodman,” 1816; “Blossom” and “Pale Broseley,” 1817; “Waterloo”
and “Arcade,” 1818; “Lucano” and “Ship,” 1819; “Panel Japan,”
“Geranium,” and “Oriental,” 1820; “Font” and “Marble,” 1821; “Bud and
Flower,” “Sun,” “Bonpot,” and “Union,” 1822; “Double Bonpot,” “Blue
Border,” and “Filigree,” 1823; “Image” and “Persian,” 1824; “Etruscan”
and “Bamboo,” 1825; “Blue Imperial” and “Union Wreath,” 1826.

  [Illustration: Fig. 204.]


                             MINTON & CO.

Mr. Thomas Minton, the founder of these works, was born in Wyle Cop,
Shrewsbury, in 1765, and received his education at the Shrewsbury
Grammar School. He had an only brother, Arthur Minton, and a sister,
Elizabeth. On leaving school, Thomas Minton was apprenticed to an
engraver (probably Hancock), at the Caughley China Works, at Broseley,
one of his fellow-apprentices (also a Salopian) being Richard Hicks,
who became founder of the firm of Hicks, Meigh, and Johnson. On the
expiration of his apprenticeship, Thomas Minton continued to be
employed for a time at the Caughley China Works under Mr. Turner, and
then removed to London, where he engraved some patterns for Josiah
Spode, whose London warehouse was at that time in Portugal Street.
From London, having married, he removed into Staffordshire, in 1788 or
1789, where the rapidly increasing demand for blue printed earthenware
gave promise of a good opening for so skilful a draughtsman and
engraver as he had become. On removing into Staffordshire, he set up
as a master-engraver, at Stoke-upon-Trent, his residence and engraving
shop being one of a block of buildings then called Bridge Houses, so
called from being close to Trent Bridge, which houses had been erected
by Thomas Whieldon, the first partner of Josiah Wedgwood. Here he
became very successful, one of his chief employers being Josiah Spode,
for whom he engraved a tea-ware pattern called the “Buffalo,” which
continued in demand for many years; the “Broseley,” so called from
being first produced at the Caughley Works, Broseley, by Mr. Turner,
and which, like the “Willow Pattern,” remains a favourite stock pattern
to the present day; the famous “Willow;” and many others. In the latter
he was assisted by Mr. Henry Doncaster of Penkhull; the original plate
from which this pattern was thus engraved passed from Mr. Doncaster
into the hands of Mr. Wildblood, engraver, of Burslem, and from him
into the possession of Minton & Co., where it appropriately remains,
as do also some drawings and other interesting relics. Mr. Minton
had two apprentices, one of whom, Greatbatch (father of the eminent
artist William Greatbatch, engraver of the “Waterloo Banquet”), became
chief engraver, and manager of that department at Messrs. Spode and
Copeland’s.

In 1793, having determined to commence the manufacture of earthenware,
Mr. Minton purchased a plot of land, the site of the present
manufactory, of Mr. John Ward Hassals, and commenced building on a very
small scale. The following account of the early progress of the works
has been kindly written for me by Mr. Stringer:--

   “To start with, there was one ‘Bisque,’ and one ‘Glost’ oven,
   with slip house, for preparing the clay, and only such other
   buildings and appliances as were necessary to make good working
   commencement. Mr. Minton formed an engagement with the brothers
   Poulson, who owned the works opposite to the land he had
   purchased, known as the ‘Stone Works,’[41] and who were potters
   on a small scale, and, as was then the practice, had houses on
   the works, now converted into potters’ workshops. They belonged
   to an ancient family which had been located at Boothen for
   several centuries. Mr. Joseph Poulson was the practical potter,
   and his brother Samuel was modeller, mould maker, and useful man
   of all work. It was not until May, 1796, that Mr. Minton’s works
   were in operation. Considering the magnitude of the present
   operations of the firm, which has recently adopted the globe for
   its trade mark, it may not be uninteresting to quote from an old
   cash-book, which has been fortunately preserved, an item or two
   to show from what a very humble beginning great results have
   arisen. We find the amount paid the first week, which appears
   to have been a sort of broken week (perhaps there had been some
   merry-making to celebrate the opening);--

      1796.                                           £ _s._ _d._
    May   21.   By paid wages, coals, &c., this week 12  19   5½
     „    28.    „          „          „          „  29   1   2½
    June   4.    „          „          „          „  32   9   7½
    Sept. 17.    „ Joseph Poulson 18 weeks’ wages,
                     to this day inclusive           18  18   0

   “The average weekly amount under the above head of wages, &c.,
   was within a trifle of £50, but still showing real progress.

   “The first item on the contrary side is--

         1796.                                        £ _s._ _d._
    May 23 @ June 3.   To received for goods sold,
                         ready money                 33  10  10½

   This would be for goods sold to the pot-sellers who hawked
   their wares about the country; and we find £596 10_s._ 2_d._
   was received under this head during the remaining months of the
   first year. The next year’s transactions showed a satisfactory
   advance in every respect, as did every subsequent year; and
   amongst the circumstances favouring Mr. Minton’s prosperity
   may be named--first, that aided by Mr. Poulson’s experience as
   a potter, and his own good taste as an engraver and designer,
   he produced a quality and style of ware that commanded a
   ready market; and in his brother, Mr. Arthur Minton, who had
   established himself in the trade in the metropolis, a ready and
   devoted agent to extend the trade; so much so that the business
   done by him in 1800 amounted to nearly £2,000. He was also
   fortunate in having the acquaintance of Mr. William Pownall, a
   merchant of Liverpool, who aided him with capital to extend his
   operations, and who was, for a few years, a sleeping partner
   in the business. Mr. Joseph Poulson was in a short time after
   the opening of the works admitted as a partner, and the firm
   traded as ‘Minton and Poulson’ for a short time, and then the
   style was altered to ‘Minton, Poulson, and Pownall.’ Mr. Poulson
   remained a partner until his death in 1808; and it would seem
   that up to this period, china or soft porcelain was made at the
   stone-works, but was abandoned as unprofitable until Mr. Herbert
   Minton’s experiments in after years were fully successful.”

On the failure of the eminent firm of John and William Turner, of Lane
End, the first named entered the service of Thomas Minton, and became,
in fact, the practical potter of the firm after the death of Poulson.
He effected great improvements in the bodies and glazes, and in the
general character of the productions of the works. Soon after Mr.
Minton had commenced business, a scheme having been set on foot for
monopolising the sale of Cornish clay, he and his partners purchased
an estate of eighty-four acres on Hendra Common for a comparatively
trifling sum, and also certain rights and a leasehold interest in
Treloar Common, where there was abundance of china clay and stone,
as also other valuable minerals. Having secured the property, Mr.
Minton took steps to associate with him the leading manufacturers to
work the mines. In this he appears to have been successful, and the
first meeting of “the Hendra Company” was held at the Swan Inn,[42]
Hanley, on the 8th of January, 1800, Mr. Thomas Byerley in the chair,
who represented the firm of Josiah Wedgwood and Byerley; Hollins,
Warburton & Co., by Mr. John Hollins and Mr. John Daniel; Mr. William
Adams, in person; and Minton, Poulson, and Pownall, by Mr. Minton and
Mr. Poulson. These manufacturers composed the whole of the Company,
and they agreed to purchase a part of Minton, Poulson, and Pownall’s
property. Mr. John Brindley, of Longport, was appointed agent to the
Company. The minutes of the meetings are brief in the extreme, and
there is no recital as to the objects of the Company, but there are a
few particulars which may interest the present race of manufacturers
as contrasting their present improved position, as regards the supply
of material, with what it was in those days. July 24, 1800, stone
was ordered to be sold at 50_s._ per ton at Etruria wharf, and
42_s._ at Runcorn; fifteen tons were a boat-load. A vessel, called
the _Venus_, brought to Runcorn ninety-nine tons, and the freight
was £72 7_s._ 9_d._ China clay was £6 per ton at Polemear.

  [Illustration: Figs. 205 to 210.--Messrs. Minton’s Productions.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 211 to 214.--Messrs. Minton’s Productions.]

It would seem that Mr. Minton had visited Cornwall several times--the
first time in 1798, and we are afforded an insight into the difficulty
and expense of travelling at that period, by the fact that the cost
of each journey was nearly thirty pounds. It seems that Mr. Minton
must have got the mines into something like working order during these
visits, as an immediate supply of clay and stone was available at
the time the Company was formed, and there is proof of this in the
following document:--

   “I, John Varcoe, farmer, resident in Treloar, of the parish
   of St. Denis, in the county of Cornwall, have this day agreed
   with Thomas Minton, of Stoke-upon-Trent, in the county of
   Stafford, to let to the said Thomas Minton all my right of
   lower tin bounds in Trelavour Common, for the purpose of the
   water for washing china clay, so long that Thomas Minton,
   or his representatives, may carry on the clayworks in Lord
   Arundel’s lands, or in Hendra Common--but not to hinder any
   streaming--with privilege of making pools for the use of the
   works, at the yearly rent of one pound and eleven shillings and
   sixpence, to commence at Michael. next. As witness our hands the
   26th day of July, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-nine.

                                               “JOHN VARCOE.
                                                THOMAS MINTON.

    “Signed in the presence of
    CHARLES BAGNALL.
    JAMES KENT.”

Difficulties of all kinds sprung up. Sometimes the water-courses were
obstructed; robbery of all kinds was going on; and there were also the
exacting demands of lords of the manor to battle with and satisfy. Bad
roads, imperfect machinery and methods of getting the minerals, were
other stubborn facts tending to abate “the pleasures of landlordism.”
The property was within three miles of St. Austel, but Charlestown was
then the port of shipment, and the cost of transit thither in waggons
over the wretched roads was 8_s._ per ton; cost of raising, working,
and casking, £1 15_s._; and other expenses, raised the value free on
board there to £4 15_s._ Freight from Charlestown to Liverpool 12_s._,
dues 2_s._ 6_d._, canal freight to the Potteries, 11_s._ 6_d._, and
making a moderate allowance for capital invested, the clay could not
be delivered at less than £6 15_s._ per ton.[43] As a trading concern
the Hendra Company was not a profitable one; but it afforded the
proprietors for twenty years a supply of good and pure material, and
checked any attempt at monopoly. The clay mines were abandoned, but
as there were good tin lodes on the property, and other minerals, the
investment proved not a bad one.

From the first establishment of the Pottery works at Stoke, their
success was unbroken, and not only were great advances made in
processes of manufacture, but they were so much enlarged, that at
the time of Mr. Minton’s death in 1836, they were among the most
important in the district. Mr. Minton married, on January 1st, 1789,
Miss Sarah Webb, of Bruton Street, London, and by her had a family of
four sons, two of whom were the Rev. Thomas Webb Minton and Herbert
Minton, and six daughters. After his marriage, his mother-in-law, Mrs.
Webb, resided with them, and was a valuable acquisition to him in his
business; keeping his books and accounts, and being, in fact, the
financial manager of the concern. She received and paid all money,
and superintended the entire office arrangements, thus leaving Mr.
Minton at liberty to devote his entire time to the manufactory and to
the engraving. Mrs. Minton, also, so far as the cares of her home and
family would permit, took her share in the business.

Mr. Herbert Minton, the second son, was born at the house erected at
the works, at Stoke-upon-Trent, in March, 1792, and when old enough,
was, with his brother and sister, sent to a dame-school kept by Miss
Cheadle, at the only house, beyond what is now the Queen’s Inn, at
that time existing on the Liverpool Road, the remainder being fields
and gardens. At that time the Mintons had removed from the house at
the Works to one on Talbot Bank (now Hill Street, corner of Commerce
Street). Later on, Herbert Minton (as was also his brother) was
sent to Audlem Grammar School, under the Rev. Nicholas Breakspear,
where he remained until nearly fourteen, when he was placed in his
father’s manufactory. In 1808, when only sixteen, he had attained such
proficiency in the business that he became traveller and salesman, and
represented the house both in London and the provinces; and this he
continued till more pressing engagements necessitated his more general
attendance at the works.

   “He was ever at the works, before any one else in the morning,
   and frequently at five o’clock. In the depth of winter, or
   however inclement the weather, at all seasons of the year,
   nothing hindered his early commencement of the duties of the
   day. Lucifer-matches were unknown in those days, and he,
   therefore, usually brought a tinder-box in his pocket--the
   old flint and steel affair. He thus procured a light and made
   himself a fire. Then he would proceed to examine the stock in
   the warehouses, that he might be enabled to order what was
   necessary to replenish it, and thus keep the printers and others
   constantly at work. He also devoted a certain portion of his
   time to the mixing-room, in order to keep up the supply of
   bodies, glazes, &c. Then he would proceed to the counting-house,
   where I,” says Mr. Stringer, “was an assistant-cashier under
   his special superintendence. To convey an idea of his peculiar
   nicety and accuracy in this department of his labours, I may
   relate the fact that, on a certain Saturday evening, after
   examining my cash account, Mr. Herbert told me that I was one
   _halfpenny_ short in my balance. He was aware of my usual
   accuracy, and was surprised even at this trifling mistake. I
   opened my cash-box for further examination, when, to my good
   fortune, I discovered the missing halfpenny within it standing
   on its edge. This rectified the supposed mistake, and afforded
   us both a hearty laugh.”

In 1817, Thomas and Herbert Minton were admitted into partnership
with their father, the firm being “Thomas Minton and Sons.” In 1821,
the elder brother, Thomas Webb Minton, quitted the works, for the
purpose of studying for the Church, and he was ordained in 1825, taking
his first curacy at Chesterfield, and afterwards at St. Cuthberts,
Darlington, and other places. He died in 1870, at Darlington, where
he was incumbent of the Church of the Holy Trinity. In 1828 the
partnership was dissolved, although Mr. Herbert Minton continued to
devote his energies to the development of the concern. On his father’s
death, in 1836, he again took up the business, and shortly afterwards
took into partnership Mr. John Boyle, under the style of “Minton and
Boyle.” In 1841, Mr. Boyle withdrew from the firm, and, about 1842,
became a partner with Mr. Wedgwood; and in 1845, Mr. Michael Hollins,
nephew to Mrs. Minton, joined the firm under the style of “Herbert
Minton and Co.” In 1849 a nephew of Mr. Minton’s, Mr. Colin Minton
Campbell, now M.P. for North Staffordshire, joined the firm under the
same style. In 1858, Herbert Minton died, and Messrs. Hollins and
Campbell continued the manufactory. The present head of the firm is Mr.
Colin Minton Campbell, M.P.; the trading style being simply “Mintons.”

  [Illustration: Fig. 215.]

Up to 1798, white, cream-coloured, and blue printed wares only were
made at these works. In that year, semi-transparent porcelain was made,
and continued until 1811, when it was abandoned, and earthenware only
again produced. In 1821 it was again produced, and soon afterwards
china was commenced and has been a staple branch to the present day.
In 1825 some of the more skilled workmen from the Derby works found
employment with Mr. Minton, and brought their skill to bear on his
productions. “Among these were Steele, Bancroft, and Hancock, as
painters in fruit and flowers.” In 1836 Mr. Herbert Minton, as will
be shown, first conceived the idea of making encaustic paving tiles.
Mr. John Simpson held the position of principal enamel painter of
figures and the highest class decorations, from about 1837 to 1847,
when he removed to London to take charge of the porcelain painting
at Marlborough House. Mr. Samuel Bourne, of Norton-in-the-Moors,
Staffordshire, who had been apprenticed to Messrs. Wood and Caldwell,
to learn the art of enamel-painting, and who had attained by his
industry and talents a high reputation, entered the service of Mr.
Minton, in 1828, as chief designer and artist, and continued to render
the firm occasional services until 1860, when the infirmities of
increasing years necessitated his retirement.

  [Illustration: Fig. 216.]

In 1849 M. Arnoux, son of a celebrated manufacturer of hard porcelain
at Toulouse, visited Stoke, bringing with him an introduction from
Mr. Evans, of Birmingham; when it was arranged that M. Arnoux should
superintend and carry out the patent which, in 1839, Mr. Minton, in
conjunction with Dr. Wilton George Turner, had taken out. This was for
“an improved porcelain,” “made from Kaolin or Cornish clay, made into
cream and passed through sieves; Dorsetshire or similar clay treated
in like manner; and pure feldspar, all in certain proportions and
mixed with great care.” In this, the bisque was produced by submitting
it to a less heat than usual before glazing, and then, when dipped,
subjecting it “to a greater degree of heat than is usual for the mere
purpose of glazing, and effecting the glazing at the same time.” The
glazes were also of peculiar composition. Beyond various experiments,
this was not carried out until 1849, when this hard paste porcelain
for chemical purposes was brought to such perfection, that it was
pronounced to be better than that of Meissen or Berlin. There was,
however, so much risk in firing this ware, in consequence of the
difficulty of procuring a sagger capable of withstanding the necessary
heat, that the manufacture was abandoned, and M. Arnoux turned his
attention to the artistic decoration of the ordinary manufacture, and
to his continual zeal and ability, combined with the enterprise which
has always distinguished the firm, England is indebted for the highest
honours in this branch of their national industries.

M. Emile Jeannest was engaged as sculptor, and in 1854 he left and took
an appointment with Messrs. Elkington, in whose service he died.

M. Carrier de Belleuse succeeded M. Jeannest, and remained some
years, when he returned to Paris, and attained so high an eminence as
a sculptor that he has been placed on the Commission for the Sèvres
Manufactory.

He was succeeded by M. Protât, who, after having executed some of the
stone statues now adorning the India Office, returned to France.

Previous to this, Parian was, about 1842, introduced, and formed a
staple branch of Messrs. Minton’s productions. In 1851 Herbert Minton
and Augustus John Hoffstaedt took out a patent for “improvements in the
manufacture.” In the same year Herbert Minton and James Nasmyth took
out a patent for “certain improvements in machinery.” In the same year,
1851, the “Great Exhibition” was held, and resulted in an award of
great merit to this firm, an honour which each successive exhibition,
whether English or foreign, has augmented. In 1850 Majolica was added
to the other art-productions of this manufactory, and in this it
still stands pre-eminent. No firm has surpassed them in the sharpness
of details; the purity of colours; the excellence of glaze, or the
artistic character of these goods, which comprise every description of
both useful and ornamental articles. In 1851 Della Robbia and Palissy
ware were also here commenced.

  [Illustration: Figs. 217 to 220.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 221 to 223.--Minton’s productions.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 224 to 229.--Minton’s productions.]

The history of the manufacture of encaustic and other tiles by Minton,
Hollins & Co. is the history of the entire modern trade in these
useful and beautiful articles. In 1828 Herbert Minton first turned
his attention to the subject, but was prevented by circumstances from
fully developing his plans. In 1830 Mr. Samuel Wright, of Shelton,
took out a patent for “a manufacture of ornamental tiles.” This, in
January 1844, he supplemented by another patent for the “manufacture of
ornamental bricks and quarries for floor pavements and other purposes.”
Mr. Wright’s experiments were highly satisfactory, but from various
causes, although he executed several orders, they were not commercially
successful. Becoming weary of his almost resultless experiments, he
sold his moulds and patent rights to Mr. Minton, who agreed to pay him
a royalty of 10 per cent. on all the tiles sold. Mr. Minton commenced
the manufacture in a single room next to the present throwing-house at
the earthenware works, and only three men were at first employed. He
was much aided in his task by the late Mr. George Leason, a practical
potter, who had been brought up under him.

  [Illustration: Figs. 230 to 233.]

   “Mr. George Berks,” says Mr. Stringer, to whom I am indebted for
   the following notes, “who was a man of good general attainments,
   did what modelling was required. One of the earliest
   improvements effected by Mr. Minton was the substitution of
   brass moulds for the plaster ones used by Mr. Wright, which
   enabled the maker to beat up the clay so as to give a sharper
   edge to the tile. Before that alteration the edges had to be
   cut after they were taken from the plaster mould. A decided
   advantage was thus gained; but innumerable other difficulties
   had to be encountered, chiefly arising from the irregular
   contraction of the clays. Sometimes the inlaid parts would at
   a slight tap at the back of the tile fall out, or the tiles
   would become stained in the firing; and in short all sorts of
   ill luck and misadventures were the weekly result. The tiles
   were at first fired in a small oven at the china works which
   would hold about 700 tiles, and he and his fellow labourers
   used regularly to go there to witness the drawing of the oven.
   Time after time they found nearly the whole contents spoilt in
   one way or other, and they were carted away to form part of the
   foundations on which many of our pottery streets now stand. If
   it so happened that 100 out of the 700 proved fairly good, the
   fact was a source of encouragement to all concerned. Repeated
   failures were, however, only followed by further experiments.
   Mr. Minton was ever confident that skill and perseverance would
   in the end prove a success; but surely never was any man’s
   patience or pocket more sorely or severely tried. Occasionally
   a few orders were satisfactorily executed, but they were on a
   comparatively small scale. In April, 1836, Mr. Minton sent to
   Mr. Josiah Booker, of Liverpool, a plan for tiling his hall,
   and this gentleman adopted Mr. Minton’s suggestions; and it
   would seem gave the order with the view of forming an opinion
   of the tiles for the purpose of exportation; little imagining
   the difficulties that had to be got over before they could
   be successfully introduced at home. The prices quoted to Mr.
   Booker were 15s. per square yard, and 6_d._ per tile of 6
   inches square for the border, being about one-half the prices
   Mr. Wright had charged them. In 1837, a hall pavement was
   laid in the mansion of Sir John P. Orde, Bart., at Kilmoray,
   Loch-Gilp-Head, N.B. It should be remarked that, at this time,
   the only colours made use of were buff, red, and chocolate. In
   November, 1836, after the death of his father, Mr. John Boyle
   joined Mr. Minton as partner, and so continued until December,
   1841. This gentleman had a keen eye to the profitable working
   of the manufactures, and often cast uneasy glances at the
   corner near the throwing-house, and at length began to urge
   that that department ought to be abandoned. It was on one of
   these occasions that Mr. Minton uttered the well-known words,
   “Say no more on the subject, Mr. Boyle. I will make these
   tiles if they cost me a guinea each!” We do not hear that any
   other remonstrance followed this rebuke. The late Harriette,
   Duchess of Sutherland, was one of the early patrons of the tile
   manufacture; and, indeed, the Staffordshire potteries generally
   are much indebted to her Grace for the great encouragement she
   ever gave, and the interest she ever took in every improvement
   calculated to elevate the character of our manufactures,
   and advance the prosperity of the district. Her example and
   influence amongst the nobility afforded much encouragement to
   the British potter, and tended greatly to the attainment of that
   success in the art which has been so marked of late years. The
   tiles were extensively introduced at Trentham Hall, and some
   of the finest of the early specimens are to be found there.
   The first work of great importance that was undertaken was the
   floor of the Temple Church, London. Lewis N. Cottingham, Esq.,
   F.S.A., made an examination of the Chapter House, Westminster,
   in January, 1841, in order to procure suitable examples for
   the tiles proposed to be used in the restoration of the Temple
   Church. On the removal of portions of the boarded floor the
   pavement was found to be in a very perfect state, few tiles
   being broken, and the colours in many parts as brilliant as
   when laid down. Mr. Minton undertook to reproduce the various
   designs composing this ancient pavement. It was a work of
   great labour and difficulty; but was accomplished to the
   satisfaction of the architect, and all others interested in
   the work. The charge made was merely nominal, taking into
   account the great expenditure necessarily involved at a time
   when so many difficulties still attended the manufacture. Mr.
   Minton was a diligent collector of old tiles, and friends
   amongst the nobility, gentry, and clergy, in all parts of the
   country, ministered to his taste, and sent him either examples
   or sketches of such as they met with in their travels; nothing
   pleased him better than to receive choice specimens and to
   superintend their reproduction. The late Mr. Welby Pugin
   furnished Mr. Minton with many tile drawings, some of which he
   had designed during his many night journeys to Staffordshire,
   whilst engaged in the extensive works for Lord Shrewsbury, at
   Alton Towers and Cheadle Church.”

  [Illustration: Figs. 234 to 239.--Minton’s productions.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 240 to 243.]

In June, 1840, Mr. Richard Prosser took out a patent for making a
variety of articles from clay in a powdered state, viz., buttons,
tesseræ, floor tiles, glazed tiles, &c., by pressure; by preference
using screw presses of different powers for articles containing up to
and including fifty square inches of surface in each piece; articles of
larger surface, and of course requiring a greater pressure, being made
by hydraulic press, the pumps of which were worked by steam. Patents
were taken for England, France, and America. That for France lapsed
in consequence of a condition of the French patent law requiring the
process being worked in that country within six months of its date;
the political condition of France at that time, in the opinion of the
patentee, not being safe for the investment of capital. Of this
patent and its application, the following notes, drawn up for me by Mr.
John Turley, are of especial interest.

   “The English patent was very early introduced to the firm of
   Minton and Boyle, of Stoke-on-Trent. Mr. Minton took a lively
   interest in it, but not so Mr. Boyle. Mr. Prosser sold the
   half part of the English patent to Mr. Minton. Arrangements
   were made for the prompt commencement of making glazed tiles,
   tesseræ, and buttons, at Messrs. Minton and Boyle’s works. Two
   work-rooms were given up to Mr. John Turley, engineer, who at
   first placed six button presses in one, and a large tile-press
   in the other, and commenced making white glazed tiles (6 in.)
   and buttons in these works in August, 1840. Prior to this
   time, white glazed or Dutch tiles (6 in.) could be bought in
   the London market for less money than paid to the journeyman
   potter for making this article at Stoke. The demand for white
   glazed tiles was soon very great, and has subsequently become
   a staple article of manufacture in most potting districts by
   this process. Buttons, tiles, and tesseræ continued their
   progress in numbers manufactured until 1843, when, on March
   8th, the process of making tesseræ was exhibited by Mr. Turley
   at the Society of Arts, London--Lecture by Cowper; Paper read
   by Blashfield--and 290 boxes of buttons, three dozen in each,
   given away at the doors. March 11th, 1843, the same press
   and process was exhibited by Mr. Turley at the Marquess of
   Northampton’s soirée, as President of the British Association--a
   brilliant gathering, at which were present Prince Albert, the
   Duke of Wellington, Sir Robert Peel, a number of bishops, and
   about thirty foreign princes. The late Prince Consort took so
   much interest in the process, that Mr. Prosser and Mr. Minton
   decided that a description of the process and a drawing of the
   press as then seen at work should be prepared forthwith, and
   presented to his Highness, which was done, and presented on
   the 15th of March, 1843. This paper, with copy of drawing of
   the press, was reproduced in Dr. Ure’s ‘Dictionary of Arts and
   Manufactures,’ edited by Robert Hunt. After this introduction
   to the Society of Arts and the British Association, Mr. J. M.
   Blashfield, Digby Wyatt, and Owen Jones, by their designs and
   favourable influences, brought the geometrical floor tile with
   its many colours, in combination with the encaustic floor tile,
   into extensive use in the rebuilding of churches, noblemen’s
   mansions, and other public buildings.

   “In August, 1840, he commenced making buttons and tesseræ with
   six presses, and continued progressing until December, 1841,
   when twenty-five presses were at work; September 5, 1842,
   sixty-two presses at work; and at March, 1844, ninety presses
   at work, with ninety women and one hundred and eighty girls.
   The girls working half-days and at school half-days--one girl
   being required to place on setters for firing the produce of one
   press. The first six months of 1844 the firm received orders for
   27,123 great gross, and sold 22,519 great gross. Infringements
   were now rife in various directions. Most of them were stopped
   on receipt of notice. Two were costly suits: one, by Mr. Thomas
   Prosser (who held the American Patent) _versus_ Mr. Henry
   Van Wart, as an American merchant, for sending into the States
   buttons made in England irrespective of the American patentee;
   the other suit was for infringement in making--R. Prosser and
   H. Minton _versus_ Chamberlain and Lilly. This trial
   ended August 22, 1845, at Bristol, and its issue was, that
   Chamberlain and Lilly should work under license. February 3,
   1845, an arrangement was made between Minton and Prosser and
   Mr. H. Van Wart to close the American suit. The course for the
   sale was again clear for buttons, and progress was made in the
   manufacture and sale thereof for a few years, when an abrupt
   termination took place from the unfavourable surroundings
   and the inability of the patentees to agree as to the future
   manufacture.

    In 1845 were made 33,928 great gross.
     „ 1846   „    „  50,493   „     „
     „ 1847   „    „  26,784   „     „
     „ 1848   „    „   1,289   „     „

   when button-making ceased at Stoke.”

In August, 1845, Mr. Michael Daintry Hollins joined Mr. Minton in
the general manufacturing business; and the tile department formed a
separate concern, under the style of Minton, Hollins, & Co. Mr. Hollins
was a nephew of Mr. Minton’s deceased wife (who was Miss Hollins, of
Shelton,) and had been educated for the medical profession. In 1846,
Mr. Samuel Barlow Wright, son of the original patentee, was admitted to
a share in the business of the tile works, under the style of Minton,
Hollins, and Wright. The patent of Mr. Wright was for fourteen years,
and was renewed for seven years in 1844. At that period the works
continued to be conducted at a loss, and but a small amount of business
was done. It may be safely asserted that during the entire existence
of the patent, so far from profit being the result, Mr. Minton had
sacrificed many thousands of pounds to perfect the manufacture; to
say nothing of the extraordinary liberality of his gifts of tiles. In
other hands the manufacture might have proved a pecuniary success at
an earlier period; but Mr. Minton was lavish in his expenditure in
adopting every mechanical or other improvement--hydraulic presses under
Prosser’s patent, Napier’s steam hammer, &c.--that promised further
success.

  [Illustration: Figs. 244 to 246. Minton’s Vases.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 247 and 248.--Minton’s Majolica.]

Previous to the year 1848, the only process of printing which had
succeeded for the decoration of pottery, was the one from engraved
copper-plates. In this process all the lines that form the picture
are cut into the metal, and these lines were filled in by the printer
with the required colour, which had previously been mixed with boiled
oil. The impression was then taken on tissue paper, at the ordinary
copper-plate printing press, and from the paper transferred to the
ware. In that style the picture or ornament was formed by a succession
of lines, so that it was almost impossible to produce an even layer of
colour, so desirable in flat-surface ornamentation. In 1848, Messrs.
Collins and Reynolds, who had for some years carried on in London the
business of decorative and picture printers, submitted to Mr. Minton
some trials they had made of transferring to pottery impressions taken
on paper from the flat surface of metal or stone, instead of from the
engraved lines; and by that process broad and flat layers of colour
could be produced, and several colours transferred at the same time
to the ware. These first-trials were made with ordinary pigments;
and, therefore, only served to show the power of transferring the
impression from the paper to the ware. Mr. Minton perceived at once
that the process would, in all probability, prove of advantage, and
supplied the proper enamelling colours for further experiments. It
was now found, however, that these colours were much more difficult
of management than the ordinary pigments. This arose from their being
mixed with so large a proportion of glass, which necessitated the
use of stronger oils to carry the colour; and this again caused the
colour, when of sufficient strength, to blister in the kiln. Mr. Minton
was not, however, discouraged; and, believing that the difficulties
would ultimately be overcome, he joined the experimenters in taking out
a patent for the process. The patent is dated the 14th March, 1848, and
is entitled “for improvements in ornamenting china, earthenware, and
glass.” The difficulties so early encountered were very long in being
overcome; months, and even years, of disappointment and loss followed,
and it was only after innumerable trials had shown what particular
oils and of what strength were required for different colours, that
the obstacles were finally surmounted, and the process established as
an additional and improved means of mechanical decoration. The process
was applied to the decoration of earthenware and china generally, both
useful and ornamental; but has proved to be more successful with flat
surfaces. It was at an early period applied to ornamenting glazed
tiles, and quickly supplanted the old and more expensive method of
ground-laying. Mr. Pugin was the earliest patron of these tiles, and
introduced them into the new palace of Westminster; the walls of the
smoke-room of the House of Commons being the first instance of their
use. Numerous specimens were shown at the Exhibition of 1851, and
again at Paris in 1855, on which occasion the inventor and manager
(Mr. Alfred Reynolds) obtained a first-class certificate. And here
it should be remarked that Messrs. Minton took every opportunity of
bringing before the Jury the merits of those in their employ, whom they
considered deserving of distinction for the service they had rendered
to them. There is now a very extensive trade done in these tiles, which
are very beautiful and every variety of design. They are applied to
wall decoration generally, also to hearths, the sides of fire-places,
the making of flower boxes, and to a variety of other useful and
ornamental purposes. In this improvement both beauty and cheapness are
combined. To speak of the merits of these, even briefly, would occupy
a chapter; it is sufficient to say that they are of every possible
variety of design--floral, geometrical, mythological, historical, and
otherwise,--and that the combinations of colours and the arrangement
of the patterns give them a brilliancy all their own. Later on the
partnership with Mr. Hollins terminated, and that gentleman continued
the manufacture of encaustic and other tiles. (See page 213.)

Of the variety of productions of Minton’s works in former, and at the
present times, it is impossible to speak in detail. So varied, so
distinct, and so extensive are they in material, in body, in style,
in decoration, and in uses, that anything like a detailed account
becomes impossible. In stoneware, all the ordinary articles--jugs,
mugs, bottles, &c.--are extensively produced; many of the designs of
the pressed jugs being marked by pure taste and simplicity of design.
In ordinary earthenware, dinner, tea, breakfast, toilet, and other
services, and all the usual articles, are made in great variety, from
the ordinary white and blue printed wares, up to richly enamelled and
gilt patterns.

  [Illustration: Figs. 249 and 250.]

One of the processes successfully adopted by Minton’s is that of
_pâte-sur-pâte_, a process in which the artist, instead of using
colour, employs liquid clay, in which he paints, or rather “lays on”
his design; the whole being afterwards glazed. In this process M. Marc
Solon, formerly of Sèvres, is particularly successful, and the trays,
plaques, &c., produced by him are characterised by pure but severe
taste, and masterly treatment. His monogram, the combined letters M and
S, distinguish his best works.

In imitation of bronze Messrs. Minton have succeeded far beyond
anything before attained, in producing not only a perfect colour,
but a thoroughly metallic appearance; their drinking cups and other
articles in bronzed porcelain are well designed and of high character.
The Persian ware also is of the highest class both in point of correct
adaptation of Persian designs and in manipulative treatment.

The pierced or perforated articles are marvels of lightness and of
skill. These, which are among the most difficult tasks for the potter,
are, as emanating from Minton’s, perfect in every minute detail; they
are gems for any cabinet.

  [Illustration: Fig. 251.]

In china, besides all the usual services--dinner, tea, breakfast,
dessert, _déjeuner_, toilet, trinket, etc.--an endless variety of fancy
and ornamental goods are produced. Notably among these are vases,
ewers, tazzæ, and other articles of extreme beauty, and of every style
of decoration. A marked feature in these is the embossed gilding
of borders, &c. by a process patented by the firm. In Parian, the
statuary, busts, groups, vases, ewers, and other articles, equal those
of almost any manufactory; while in majolica, della Robia, and other
goods, the productions of this firm stand pre-eminent. The engravings,
Figs. 205 to 264, give a fair idea of the marvellous beauty and variety
of Minton’s goods. Whatever emanates from their factory, indeed, may
safely be pronounced to be perfect and unsurpassed, both in design, in
manipulation, in body, in glaze, and in colouring. Messrs. Minton rank
among the foremost houses throughout the world in those specialities
of manufacture to which they have devoted their unbroken attention.
The richness and elaborate character of some of the designs, and the
faultlessly artistic treatment of others, are shown on the examples I
have selected for illustration.

  [Illustration: Figs. 252 to 254.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 255 to 258.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 259.--Minton’s Productions.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 260 to 264.--Minton’s Productions.]

The marks used by Messrs. Minton from time to time are the name
“MINTON” impressed on the body of the ware; the names “MINTON,”
“MINTON & BOYLE,” “MINTON & CO.,” etc., printed on the surface; and
an imitation of the Sèvres double _L_, with the initial M added.
This latter mark, of which two examples are given on Figs. 255 and
256, is pencilled in blue on the ware; it occurs on fine porcelain
tea services, richly painted and gilt, and of remarkably good, and
sometimes very elaborate, design. Sometimes also the letter M alone
(Fig. 221) occurs. Of late years, too, an ermine spot (Fig. 222) in
gold or colours has occasionally been used.

  [Illustration: Fig. 265.]

The name MINTON impressed, or “stamped,” in the body of the ware, was
not used until 1861, so that this will be a guide to possessors in
appropriating examples.

  [Illustration: Figs. 266 to 270.]

Sometimes the words “FELSPAR CHINA,” “NEW STONE” or “SEMI CHINA” occur.

Other marks used by Messrs. Minton are shown on Figs. 266 to 270.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Hollins._--The history of the famous works of Messrs. Minton,
Hollins, & Co., and of the rise and development of their manufacture
of encaustic, enamelled, majolica, and other tiles, has already been
given on pages 195 to 206, and therefore need not be repeated. In
1868, as there stated, the partnership ceased, and from that time the
manufacture of tiles passed into the hands of, and has been continued
solely by, Mr. Michael Daintry Hollins, under the old style of “Minton,
Hollins, & Co.” The productions of the works, as of old, consist of
unglazed encaustic, and tesselated, or rather, geometrical, tiles
for pavements; glazed encaustic tiles for fire hearths; majolica and
enamelled tiles for grate cheeks, flower-boxes, wall-linings, &c.; and
plain and painted tiles for various species of decoration. These are
all made from the same moulds, and of precisely the same excellent
quality both in body and decoration as under the old firm; the business
is, indeed, in every respect the same as before the dissolution.

The engravings, Figs. 271 to 282, show some of the designs of Minton,
Hollins, & Co., and are of the highest style of art. The unglazed and
the glazed encaustic tiles for pavements are made of the hardest and
most durable materials that have yet been discovered--far beyond those
of many other makers--and the workmanship as well as the designs are of
a superior order. They are made in the simple red and buff patterns of
mediæval times, as well as in various combinations of colours; among
these are black, white, buff, chocolate, salmon, green, blue, red,
grey, yellow, &c., and these are varied in their combinations to an
almost endless variety.

In majolica tiles, for flower-boxes, many effective and appropriate
designs are made; these are of bold relief and richly coloured. Among
the patterns are tulips and other flowers in high relief, painted true
to nature, and of remarkable richness. Earthenware tiles, printed or
painted, not in relief, are also largely produced for the same purpose.

For wall decoration, fire-place cheeks and linings, and other purposes,
the variety of tiles produced by the firm is very extensive, and
embraces almost every class of design. In these are some with the
patterns (notably the lily) all in very high relief, and the colouring
of the richest and most effective character.

  [Illustration: Figs. 271 to 276.--Minton, Hollins & Co.’s Tiles.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 277.--Minton, Hollins & Co.’s Tiles,
  Philadelphia Exhibition.]

Others have their patterns painted by hand on the flat surface, by
skilled artists; and others, again, are transfer-printed, or a
combination of printing and painting. Some form a more or less rich
diaper, and others are separate or continuous patterns, while others
again form borders of more than usual elegance.

  [Illustration: Fig. 278.]

Among special patterns may be named a series of masterly designs of
Morning, Noon, Evening, and Night, represented by well-conceived
figures in blue on a black ground; a series of emblematic designs of
the Seasons, printed in chocolate or other monochrome on the white or
buff surface; and a series of allegorical, mythological, and fabulous
subjects, each treated in the same admirable manner. The body of some
is of fine white earthenware, very hard and durable, and others are
buff, grey, or cream-coloured, and in each of these bodies the tiles
are produced of many patterns and of every degree of finish.

  [Illustration: Figs. 279 to 281.--Minton, Hollins & Co.’s Tiles.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 282.--Mosaic and Alabaster Reredos by
  Minton, Hollins & Co., Philadelphia Exhibition.]

The geometric or tesselated pavements are of every conceivable variety;
the tiles composing them being made of different forms and of all
shades of colour, but all produced with the utmost mechanical nicety so
as to “fit” in ever-changing variety. A notable feature in the tiles of
this firm is the richness, the clearness, and the purity of the colours
and the excellence of the glaze; these features, added to faultless
quality of body, to high-class artistic treatment of patterns, and to
excellence of mechanical workmanship, place them high in estimation.
Messrs. Hollins were very extensive exhibitors at the Philadelphia
Exhibition, 1876, and their productions excited great interest and
admiration. One of their main attractions was a lovely chimney-piece
composed of tiles exquisitely painted with humming birds, &c.,
and over it a lovely painting of a mother and her children executed
with perfect artistic taste and feeling on thirty tiles; this great
achievement in ceramics is shown on Fig. 277. Another notable exhibit
was a reredos in mosaic (Fig. 282), and in mosaic also was a fine head
of Washington. The rest of their exhibits consisted of every possible
variety of tiles, and all of equal excellence. The marks used are
“MINTON HOLLINS & CO. PATENT TILE WORKS, STOKE ON TRENT”; “MINTON & CO.
Patent, STOKE ON TRENT”; “MINTON HOLLINS & CO. STOKE ON TRENT”; “M. H.
& Co.,” &c., at the back of the tiles.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Trent Pottery._--These works were established in 1861 by Mr. George
Jones, the head of the present firm of “George Jones and Sons.” Messrs.
Jones manufacture all the ordinary description of ordinary earthenware;
from the gaily-decorated articles required in Africa and in South
America, and the spotless white granite for the United States, to
stoneware, and printed, enamelled, and gilt wares, for home use and
for the Colonies. The firm also make a large and striking variety of
articles in majolica, in which they successfully vie with most houses
in the trade. In this they make both useful and ornamental articles,
most of which are of a high order of art, being well modelled,
carefully finished, and of a quality that will bear comparison with
most others. Some of the productions exhibited at Paris in 1867 (when
they obtained a medal), at London in 1871, and at Vienna in 1873,
are shown by Figs. 283 to 306. The imitation Palissy ware is highly
successful. In vases, candelabra, centre and side pieces, flower
shells, and numberless other articles, Messrs. Jones have produced many
striking and good designs. Some of these are shown on the engravings;
others, especially an aquatic centre-piece of four heights, in Cupids,
shells, dolphins, and coral; a flower-pot, in which the magnolia forms
the basis of ornamentation; and an ewer abundantly decorated with
lizards, snakes, &c., are bold, good, and highly effective in design.
The mark used by Messrs. Jones is simply the monogram composed of the
initials G J joined together.

  [Illustration: Figs. 283 to 286.--Trent Pottery Majolica.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 287 to 306.--Trent Pottery Majolica.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Albert Works, and Copeland Street Works._--(Poole, Stanway, &
Wood.)--The business of this firm was established in 1859 in the
Albert Works, Liverpool Road, by Messrs. George Turner, Joseph Emery
Hassall, and William Bromley, as a Parian manufactory only. In
1863, the present much larger works were built. In 1862, Mr. Bromley
retired from the concern, and in 1863 Mr. Thomas Peake joined it, and
the firm continued as “Turner, Hassall, & Peake” until 1871, when the
latter withdrew, and was succeeded by Mr. Poole, when the style became
“Turner, Hassall, and Poole.” In 1873 Mr. Hassall retired, and was
succeeded by Mr. Stanway, and the firm then became “Turner, Poole,
and Stanway.” Later on Mr. Turner also retired from the firm, and
Mr. Josiah Wood, having entered into partnership with the remaining
partners, the style was altered to its present form of “Poole, Stanway,
and Wood.” At first Parian only was made, but after a time the
decoration of china (bought in the white) was added. After this had
been done for about ten years the manufacture of china was commenced,
and is now a large and profitable branch of the business. The present
productions of these works are Parian, principally statuary, of the
higher quality in body, in colour, and in workmanship; china, in which
tea, breakfast, dessert, trinket, and other services, vases, figures,
groups, &c., are made in every style of decoration, and of excellent
quality; majolica, in all the usual varieties of articles; and terra
cotta, in which they produce water-jugs, fern-stands, tobacco-jars,
filters, candlesticks, flower-vases, tea-pots, &c. The speciality of
the works is, however, in Parian, and in this they rank very, and
deservedly, high; in this the novelty was introduced by Mr. Turner
of decorating the Parian body with majolica colours. By this means
a greater clearness and brilliancy as well as softness of colour
is attained, “crazing” is avoided, and a more pleasing effect and
finish gained. The operations of the firm are not confined to the
home markets, but a considerable trade is done with foreign ports.
The terra cotta goods are produced in red and cane colour, and richly
enamelled. The body is remarkably fine and even, and very hard,
compact, and durable. In statuary Parian, a large variety of groups,
single figures, animals, and ornamental pieces are produced. The groups
and figures, both after the antique and original designs by celebrated
modellers, are of a high degree of excellence. Notably among these is
a very charming pair, “Night” and “Morning,” by Carrier. Busts, too,
are produced very extensively, and of various sizes, both copied from
classic models and of modern celebrities. In centre-pieces, compotiers,
&c., Messrs. Poole, Stanway, & Wood are particularly successful. A
set of four, with juvenile figures representing the Seasons, are
peculiarly graceful and elegant, the open-work dishes of these and
others being of admirable design and faultless finish; as is also
another in which the stem is surrounded by three cleverly modelled
Cupids. The tinting of these is pleasing and artistic; the creamy
richness of the body (of course unglazed) giving a peculiar softness to
the flesh, while the drapery and accessories, being delicately coloured
and glazed, impart a finish to the designs that is very charming. A
centre-piece with a pedestal rising from three gracefully modelled
female figures, and supporting an exquisite open-work dish, is of
peculiar elegance; the angles of the tripod base are formed of boldly
modelled sea-horses, whose curled tails rise gracefully up and support
three smaller dishes. A very successful and powerfully conceived design
is a comport in which the base is formed of three young Tritons, who,
surrounding an elegant lyre standard, alternate with the same number of
shells; above them rises the open-work bowl.

It is interesting to add that one of the partners of this firm, Mr.
Josiah Wood, is a worthy descendant of a long line of potters; his
grandfather, Aaron Wood, himself a famous potter, was the son of Aaron
Wood (who was apprenticed to Dr. Thomas Wedgwood), and the brother of
the celebrated Enoch Wood, of whom notices are given in other parts
of this volume. Mr. Stanway, another of the partners, is the son of
William Stanway, whose fifty years’ connection with the Wedgwoods I
have spoken of in my “Life of Wedgwood” and alluded to in another part
of this volume.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Glebe Street Works_, and _Wharf Street Works_.--These two
manufactories belong to Messrs. Robinson and Leadbeater, and are
entirely confined to the production of Parian goods, of which they
are among the largest and most extensive producers, both for the home
markets and for exportation. The _Glebe Street Works_ were commenced
in 1850, by a clever Italian figure-modeller named Giovanni Meli, who
produced clever groups and single figures, till 1865, when he sold the
entire business, with its plant, moulds, and machinery, to Messrs.
Robinson and Leadbeater, and returned to Italy with the full intention
of there commencing a terra cotta manufactory. This he relinquished,
after a short trial, mainly through the lack of a suitable native
clay or marl for the making of his saggers. Giovanni Meli then went
to Chicago, where he succeeded in his wishes, and established a
manufactory of the kind he had attempted in Italy, and there he
continues to the present time. The _Wharf Street Works_ were commenced
in 1858 by Mr. Leveson Hill, after whose death, which occurred shortly
afterwards, they were carried on by his executors until 1870, when
they were sold to Messrs. Robinson and Leadbeater, who thus became
proprietors of both concerns. By them the works have been considerably
enlarged, and as their business operations are rapidly extending, they
bid fair to rank among the largest in the district.

The operations of the firm are entirely confined to Parian, and in this
they produce statuary groups and figures in large variety; statuettes
and busts, both classical, portrait, and imaginative; vases of endless
form, variety, and size; centre-pieces and comports of elegant design;
flower-stands; brackets and pedestals; bouquet-holders trinket-caskets;
cream-ewers; jugs, and a considerable variety of fancy articles.

By giving their constant and undivided attention to this one branch of
ceramic art (Parian), Messrs. Robinson and Leadbeater have succeeded
in so improving it both in fineness and purity of body and in tone
of colour, as to render their productions of far higher than average
merit. They have studied excellence of body, originality of design, and
cleverness of workmanship, as before that of marketable cheapness, and
in this they have done wisely. In material, they rank with the best
productions of many competing firms, while in fineness of surface and
careful manipulation they are scarcely excelled.

Among the designs produced by this firm are many of more than
average merit, and they are issued, in some instances, of large
size.--“_Clytie_,” a clever reproduction, is a bust of about
twenty-two inches in height, whilst several others (Gladstone,
Disraeli, Cobden, Tennyson, Dickens, and other modern celebrities)
are of various heights. Among their principal groups are “Innocence
Protected,” “Penelope,” “The Power of Love,” “Cupid Betrayed,” “Cupid
Captive,” “Golden Age,” “Rock of Ages,” “Guardian Angel,” “The
Immaculate Conception,” “Christ and St. John,” and “Virgin and Child;”
and in single figures are many well designed and faultlessly produced.
These are all good, and the same remark will apply to the remainder of
the figures and busts. The centre-pieces, comports, and flower-holders,
are characterized by the same good taste in design and the same
excellence in finish; their variety is great, and many of them have
a freshness and originality in conception that is very encouraging.
Messrs. Robinson and Leadbeater are very successful in their original
portrait busts, many of which they have produced, both for private
purposes and for sale. Among the latter, the busts of Abraham Lincoln,
Charles Sumner, and Governor Andrew, have had a very extensive sale
in the United States, to which market, indeed, the greater part of
their general statuary and other goods is sent. An excellent portrait
statuette of Queen Victoria may also be reckoned among their successful
productions. In addition to the States and the home markets, the firm
export largely to Canada, the Colonies, and Germany. They use no mark.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Copeland Street._--Messrs. Billington & Co. manufacture the commonest
descriptions of china in all the usual services.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Bridge Works._--Formerly worked by Messrs. Davenport & Co., W.
Adams & Co., Minton, Hollins & Co., Jones & Co., and Grose & Son,
this manufactory is now carried on by Hancock & Whittingham for the
production of the usual useful classes of earthenware.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Walker & Carter._--The manufactory now carried on by this firm
belonged formerly to Wolf, and next to his son-in-law Hamilton, and
later was worked by Z. Boyle & Co., W. Adams & Co., and Minton, Hollins
& Co. The present firm manufacture the ordinary classes of earthenware.

  [Illustration: Figs. 307 to 323.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_London Road (and Eastwood Vale)._--The works of Mr. William
Henry Goss were commenced in 1858 for the production of Parian,
ivory-porcelain, terra cotta, &c., and their progress from that time
as pure art-productions has been very marked. The most famous of the
specialities of Mr. Goss’s manufacture are porcelain floral jewellery
and dress ornaments, in which brooches, hair-pins, scent-diffusers,
crosses, and other beautiful articles are made; jewelled porcelain, in
which vases, scent-bottles, tazzæ and other ornaments are produced; and
vessels to be filled with perfumes, including illuminated scent-vases,
pomade-boxes, rice-powder jars, pastil and scented ribbon burners,
&c., these latter being made largely for the great Paris and London
perfumehouses. The process of modelling jewelled porcelain, just
alluded to, which is of extreme richness and beauty, is the invention
of Mr. Goss, who, many years ago observing that the enamel jewels on
the old Sèvres porcelain frequently dropped, or were rubbed, off,
turned his attention to the subject. The process adopted at Sèvres
was as follows: a gold foil was stamped into circles, ovals, and
other required forms for the reception of the enamels, which were
then pencilled on, and fired before applying them to the article they
were intended to decorate. After being vitrified into imitations
of uncut rubies, emeralds, &c., they were stuck on to the surface
of the porcelain with a flux, and again fired. The adhesion was by
this process often incomplete, and thus it frequently occurred that
part of the design became rubbed away. The process invented by Mr.
Goss for this mosaic jewellery, is, to indent the designs for the
intended jewelled decoration in the dry or moist clay before baking,
and in these to insert the jewels, which are all previously cut, and
thus attain an increased brilliancy. Being inserted into the hollow
or recess prepared for them, they are made secure. The process is
an extremely delicate but very ingenious and beautiful one, and the
effect produced is richer and finer than is attained by any other
processes. Real pearls are often also introduced by Mr. Goss with
good effect. For this and other purposes Mr. Goss has taken out a
patent “for improvements in manufacturing articles of jewellery, dress
ornaments, dress fastenings, smoke-shades for lamps and gas-burners,
and the handles of cups and other vessels of ceramic materials”--an
invention peculiarly applicable to the “manufacture of brooches,
earrings, the heads of scarf-pins, hair-pins, and shawl-pins, the
trinkets called charms, bracelets, necklaces, stud and ring fittings,”
and a vast number of other articles. The floral brooches, crosses,
&c., are of great beauty, and in delicacy of modelling remind one of
the famous Bristol and Derby floral plaques. Some are produced in pure
white bisqué, others are tinted in the natural colours of the flowers
represented, and others are in ivory-porcelain prepared by a patented
process.

In Parian, for which Mr. Goss ranks deservedly high, busts, statuary,
vases, tazzas, scent-jars, bread-platters, and many other ornamental
goods, are made. Notably among these are admirable busts of Charles
Swain and of myself, the author of this work; this forms the
frontispiece to the first volume. This fine work of Art was modelled
expressly for the purpose in 1875, and is pronounced by those capable
of judging to be a fine and highly successful example of Ceramic Art.
These are modelled by Mr. W. W. Gallimore, under the personal and
artistic supervision of Mr. Goss. They, as are all the busts which
emanate from this combined source, are of the highest style of Art in
point of pose and poetic treatment, and of the most careful character
in manipulative workmanship. As portrait-busts they rank far above
the average, and are, indeed, perfect reproductions of the living
originals. It is not often that this can be said of portrait-busts,
but it has been a particular study of Mr. Goss, and of his coadjutor,
Mr. Gallimore, and they have succeeded admirably.[44] Of Mr. Gallimore
it may be well to say a word or two. He at one time was engaged as
a modeller at the Belleek Works in Ireland, and while there, by the
bursting of a gun, lost his right arm. His modelling has, therefore,
ever since then, been entirely done by his left hand, and, strange as
it may seem, is far better than when he had both.

  [Illustration: Figs. 324 to 330.]

One of Mr. Goss’s specialities is ivory porcelain, and this he produces
of the full soft mellow tone which characterizes the finest ivory,
while, from the nature of the body he has by constant experiments and
study succeeded in producing, it is far more lasting and durable,
and capable of more decoration, than the ivory itself. It possesses
all the delicate beauty of the ivory, with, as just stated, more
durability, and, unlike it, is unchangeable. In this material one of
Mr. Goss’s most successful productions is a pierced scent-bottle of the
pilgrim-bottle or puzzle-jug form. Its centre is double pierced in a
very elaborate pattern, and judiciously heightened with lines of gold.

In terra cotta, which is of peculiarly fine quality and rich colour,
water-bottles and all the usual articles are made, a speciality being
the fern-leaves with which they are decorated. All kinds of enamel
colours and lustres are made at these works. The name W. H. GOSS is
sometimes stamped in the ware, and on the other higher class goods the
crest, a falcon rising, ducally gorged, is used.

       *       *       *       *       *

_London Road._--In 1856 a field on the London Road was found to contain
a valuable mine of red clay, and a manufactory of floor, roof, and
ridge tiles, &c., was commenced. This property was purchased by Mr.
W. Kirkham, who still continues the works. In 1862 Mr. Kirkham built
a manufactory for the production of Parian, terra cotta, and general
earthenware for the home and foreign markets. To this he has more
recently added the making of door-furniture, brass-founders’ fittings,
knobs, mortars and pestles, chemists’ goods, stoneware, &c.; a patent
is also worked for the production of porcelain bottle-stoppers,
feeding-bottles, &c. The terra cotta goods, comprising water-bottles,
ornamental flower-pots and stands, table-jugs, spill-cases,
tobacco-jars, and an infinite variety of other articles, are of a
high degree of excellence, both in body, in form, in colour, and in
style of ornamentation. In colour it is of a deep, rich, full red,
and is remarkably close, compact, hard, and durable in texture. The
ornamentation consists of embossed borders of more than average relief;
printed groups of Etruscan figures, borders, groups of flowers, &c.;
rich enamelling in various colours; and dead and burnished gilding.
Some of the fern decorations are graceful, natural, and elegant; and
those with the Etruscan figures and the enamelled borders are in pure
taste. The table-jugs are of excellent form, many being good examples
of severe Art, and their decorations are faultless.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Campbell Brick and Tile Company._--The company to whom this
manufactory belongs was formed in 1875 for the purpose of carrying
on the business of Mr. Robert Minton Taylor, who had till that time
conducted it at Fenton. A new manufactory was, in 1876, erected at
Stoke, when the Fenton business was transferred to it. In addition to
this, new buildings and machinery have been erected for the production
of all kinds of bricks, roofing and other building tiles, &c. The
works were established at Fenton, as just stated, by Mr. Robert Minton
Taylor--nephew to the late Mr. Herbert Minton, and until the past few
years a partner in the firm of Minton, Hollins & Co.--in 1868, on a
dissolution, consequent on effluxion of time, of the old firm. The
productions of these works, as were those at Fenton, are encaustic,
mosaic, geometrical, and majolica tiles, and in these every variety of
design, from the purely ornate to the severe classic, are made.

The encaustic tiles are produced not only in the usually simple red
and buff colours, but also in various combinations of buff, red, blue,
green, yellow, white, black, brown, grey, and every shade of compound
colour. The designs are very effective and pure, and are the result
of considerable study on the part of the artists employed in their
preparation. The geometric tiles are of every conceivable form and of
great variety in colour; they are prepared with mathematical nicety,
and produce remarkably rich and effective pavements.

One of the specialities of these works are majolica and coloured tiles.
These are of the highest possible class of beauty and excellence, and
the richness of the colours and their harmonious combinations cannot be
surpassed: they are perfect works of Art, and are a great and marked
advance upon any which have preceded them. Some have the ornament
in relief--sometimes approaching even to _alto-relievo_--and
exquisitely modelled: the ornament consisting of arabesques, foliage,
flowers, birds, &c., in endless variety. In reproduction of natural
objects, as the hawthorn, the bramble, the violet, the primrose, the
anemone, the lily, and the lilac, Mr. Minton Taylor is particularly
happy: the effect is strikingly beautiful. The tiles, of course,
are adapted for wall decorations of churches, &c., for ceilings,
grate-cheeks, lining of fire-places, flower-boxes, friezes, inlaying in
cabinet work, &c., but not for floors.

  [Illustration: Figs. 331 to 338.--Campbell & Co.’s Tiles.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 339 and 340.--Campbell & Co.’s Tiles.]

Among the other features of these works are the tesselated pavements,
which are careful reproductions of examples of the Romano-British
period. In these the antique character is well preserved, the designs
copied with scrupulous accuracy, the colours kept strictly to the
originals, and the effect of the rich guilloches admirably preserved.
Tile hearths, too, are a speciality of Mr. Minton Taylor’s, and these
are produced in great variety and of extreme beauty: they are among
the most successful adaptations of ceramic decorative Art to domestic
purposes. The principal designs are by E. Welby Pugin, John Gibbs, J.
Seddon, Dr. Dresser, and others.

The mark used by Mr. Minton Taylor while at Fenton was the name “ROBERT
MINTON TAYLOR, TILE WORKS, FENTON, NEAR STOKE-ON-TRENT,” arranged in
various ways, and impressed or raised on the back; or the initials
^{R M T}_{F T W} used in the same way. That of the present firm (the
proprietor of which is Colin Minton Campbell, Esq., M.P., and the
manager, Mr. Robert Minton Taylor) is a compass W+^N_{S}E encircled by
the words “CAMPBELL BRICK & TILE CO., STOKE-UPON-TRENT.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_Harrison and Wedgwood._--John Harrison, of Newcastle, and afterwards
of Cliff Bank, Stoke, a man possessed of some means, but little taste,
entered into partnership with Josiah Wedgwood on the latter first
commencing business. He was not a practical potter, but was taken
into partnership by Wedgwood for the advance of capital. They carried
on the business at what was Mr. Aldersea’s pottery, at the top of
Stoke, opposite the works of Hugh Booth. Here, besides agate and other
knife-hafts, they made the ordinary kinds of wares then in demand, both
“scratched” and blue. In 1754 they entered into partnership with Thomas
Whieldon, and later on the works were, I believe, bought and pulled
down by Josiah Spode.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Bankes._--Mr. R. Bankes and Mr. John Turner, in 1756, made white
stoneware on what, later, formed a part of Josiah Spode’s premises.
In 1762 Mr. Turner removed to Lane End, and about 1780 discovered a
valuable vein of clay at Green Dock; this he turned to profitable and
artistic use in the making of his fine and celebrated cane-coloured and
other wares.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Aldersea._--John and Thomas Aldersea were makers of tortoiseshell,
clouded, and other wares.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Hugh Booth_, of Cliff Bank, was one of the leading manufacturers of
the district. His productions were common cream-coloured, mottled, and,
I believe, lustre-wares. He died unmarried in June, 1789, aged 57, and
was succeeded by his brother, Ephraim.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Ephraim Booth_ (an alderman of Plymouth), who took into partnership
his two sons Hugh and Joseph, and carried on the business under the
firm of “Ephraim Booth and Sons.” The eldest of these sons, Hugh
Booth, married Ann, daughter of Thomas Lovatt, Esq., and died in
1831. This firm was somewhat extensive, and produced blue printed
and other wares. The heading of their bills in 1792 was “Eph^m Booth
& Sons, Potters to His Royal Highness the Duke of Clarence and St.
Andrew’s, in the Kingdom of Great Britain, Earl of Munster, in the
Kingdom of Ireland.” “Stoke, Staffordshire.” At that time (1792) some
of their productions were “barrel-shape” and other jugs, “ewers and
basons,” “cups and saucers, bell-shape handled,” “coffees and saucers,
fluted,” all “printed Dresden pattern;” “tureens and ladles, green
edge, cream-coloured glaze;” sallads, baking dishes, fish-drainers,
oyster-shells, pickle leaves, egg-cups, peppers, mustards, scollop
shells, sauce tureens, all stands either “green edge,” “blue edge,”
or “blue and green;” tea-pots, milks, bread and butter plates, &c.,
“narrow flute, printed Dresden pattern,” &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Wolfe._--Mr. Thomas Wolfe was a very successful manufacturer,
the latter part of last century. He died in 1818, and was, I believe,
succeeded by his son-in-law, Mr. Robert Hamilton, and afterwards by
Messrs. W. Adams and Co.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Bird._--Daniel Bird, the “flint potter,” as he was called, at Cliff
Bank (afterwards Mayers), made agate-ware knife-hafts and buttons, and
the usual earthenware of the period.

       *       *       *       *       *

The manufacturers at Stoke in 1829, were, according to Shaw, Spode;
Minton; H. and R. Daniel, who here made only porcelain, their
earthenware works being at Shelton; Adams, in one part of whose works
the first steam-engine for grinding flints is said to have been
erected; Zachary Boyle & Son, near the churchyard, who made both china
and earthenware; Thomas Mayer (Cliff Bank), formerly Daniel Bird’s,
who was called the “flint potter,” through his having ascertained the
exact proportions of flints and clays required “to prevent cracking
in the oven”; and Ward and Forrester. In 1843, there were Spode and
Copelands; Messrs. Mintons; Messrs. William Adams and Co., who at one
time or other had five separate manufactories, three of which had
formerly been Mr. Wolfe’s, the fourth the Bridge Works, and the fifth
Hugh Booth’s; Messrs. Henry and Richard Daniel; Mr. Zachary Boyle;
Messrs. Samuel and George Reade; and Messrs. Lowndes and Hill.

  [Illustration: Figs. 341 and 342.--Campbell & Co.’s Tiles.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 343.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 344.--Campbell & Co.’s Tiles.]




                              CHAPTER VI.

   Burslem--Early Potters--Earthenware Gravestones--Toft--Talor--Sans
   --Turnor--Shawe--Mitchell--Cartwright--Rich--Wood--Wood & Caldwell
   --Churchyard Works--Bell Works--Red Lion Works--Big House--Ivy
   House--Lakin & Poole--Waterloo Works, Boote & Co.--Washington
   Works--Nile Street Works--Newport Pottery--Dale Hall--Stubbs--Bates,
   Walker & Co.--Mayer & Co.--Dale Hall Pottery--Rogers--Edwards &
   Son--Dale Hall Tile Co.--Albert Street Works--Mersey Pottery--Steel
   --Maddock & Son--New Wharf Pottery--Over House Works--Swan Bank
   Pottery--Hill Top Pottery--Hill Pottery China Works--Crown
   Works--Scotia Works--Queen Street Works--Hill Works--Ralph
   Wood--Sylvester Pottery--High Street Pottery--Sneyd
   Pottery--Hadderidge Pottery--Navigation Works--Sytch
   Pottery--Kilncroft Works--Albert Pottery--Waterloo
   Works--Central Pottery--Longport--Davenports--Terra
   Cotta--Brownhills--Wood--Littler--Marsh and
   Heywood--Brownhills Pottery Company--Cobridge--Cobridge
   Works, Brownfields--Clews--Furnivals--Bates & Bennet--Abbey
   Pottery--Villa Pottery--Cockson & Seddon--Allcock & Co.--Elder
   Road Works--Warburton--Daniel, &c.


                               BURSLEM.

Plot, writing in 1686, says, “the greatest pottery they have in this
county is carried on at Burslem, near Newcastle-under-Lyme, where for
making their different sorts of pots they have as many different sorts
of clay, which they dig round about the towne, all within halfe a
mile’s distance, the best being found nearest the coale,” &c.[45] The
town has earned for itself the name of “mother of the potteries.” In
the early part of the eighteenth century, the potters in Burslem appear
to have been as follows:--

    Thos. Wedgwood (2).
    John and Samuel Cartlich.
    Robt. Daniel.
    Thos., Isaac, and Rcd. Malkin.
    Dr. Thos. Wedgwood.
    Wm., Rcd., and Jhn.(3) Simpson.
    Thos. Cartwright.
    John Wedgwood.
    Robt. Bucknall.
    Isaac Wood.
    Richard Wedgwood.
    Thos. Taylor.
    Wm. Harrison.
    John and Robt. Adams.
    Moses Marsh.
    Aaron Shaw.
    Thos. Mitchell.
    J. Warburton.
    J. Bagnall.
    Aaron Wedgwood
    H. (?) Marsh.
    Moses Shaw.
    Isaac Ball.
    Saml. Edge.
    Thos. Lockett.
    J. Tunstall.
    Moses Steel.
    Hugh Mayer.
    J. Stevenson.
    H. Beech.
    Ralph Daniel.

In 1750 the potters--_i.e._ owners of pot-works--appear to have
been--

    Moses Copeland.
    John Marsh.
    Ralph Allen.
    Moses Marsh (two).
    Aaron Shaw.
    John Daniell.
    Richd. Parrott.
    Thos. Cartlich (Olding).
    E. Astbury.
    Saml. Malkin.
    John Adams.
    Ralph Adams.
    Wm. Lockett.
    Robt. Daniell.
    Thos. Steel.
    Samuel Cartlich.
    Maria Locker.
    John Heath.
    Richd. Onions.
    Aaron Clowes.
    Ephraim Booth.
    John Taylor.
    Thos. Taylor.
    Joseph Simpson (two).
    Clark Malkin.
    Thos. Mitchell.
    John Mitchell.
    Josiah Simpson.
        Taylor (two).
    William Burn.
    J. Ball.
    Aaron Cartlich.
    Timothy Lockett.
    &c.

A century later, in 1843, according to Ward, the potters then at work
were Enoch Wood and Sons; Samuel Alcock & Co., who occupied their
pot-works at the Hill Top; Machin and Potts (formerly Machin and
Baggaley), at the Waterloo Works; Mellor, Venables & Co., Hole House;
Thomas Godwin, Burslem Wharf; John WedgWood, Hadderidge; Barker,
Sutton, and Till, Liverpool Road; Peter Hopkin, Market Place; William
Pointon, Green Head; Samuel Mayer & Co., Waterloo Road; Joseph Hawley,
Waterloo Road; Maddock & Seddon, Newcastle Street; James Vernon & Co.,
High Street; James and Thomas Edwards, Kiln Croft; Cork and Condliffe,
Queen Street; Nehemiah Massey, Bournes Bank; Ann Holland, Hill Top;
Daniel Edge, Waterloo Road; Jones and Bell, Bell Works; and those not
then occupied were the Churchyard Works (late J. and J. Jackson), the
Big House Works (formerly Thos. Wedgwood), the Hamill Street Works
(formerly Cartlidge and Beech), the Knowl Works (formerly Breezes), and
the Navigation Works, late John Waltons.

Many of the names in the earliest of these lists will be recognised
as those of successful potters even of our own day. Burslem, long the
centre of the pot-making district, was the place where the Wedgwoods
had their various works, and where Josiah Wedgwood was born. It
has, therefore, always been, as it is now, a place of considerable
importance in connection with the history of the ceramic art of our
country. It is manifestly impossible, nor would it be desirable, to
enumerate all the firms from that time forward. The following are
some of the more noted houses, exclusive of the Wedgwoods, to whom a
separate chapter will be devoted. Shaw, in 1829, mentions that besides
the various manufactories held by Enoch Wood and Sons, there were about
twenty-six other pot-works, the principal of which were Machin & Co.,
T. and B. Godwin, T. Heath, J. Cormie, J. Hall & Sons, and John Riley
Marsh.

  [Illustration: Fig. 345 to 347.

    ThomAs:
    PAin 1718

    W:M
    1·7·3·7

    R:M
    1·7·3·7]

A very interesting matter relating to the history of pottery in this
locality is the number of coarse earthenware gravestones which may
be noticed in the churchyards at Burslem, Wolstanton, and elsewhere.
They are formed of the common dark brown marl, or sagger clay, and
the inscriptions are generally deeply incised, or pressed in. In some
instances, however, they are laid on in white slip, and in others
the incised letters are filled in with white clay. They are fired in
the usual manner. The earliest, as regards date, which I noticed on
my cursory examination of the two churchyards just mentioned, is at
Wolstanton, and bears the inscription, “ThomAs PAin 1718.” (Fig. 345).
In the same churchyard are other earthenware memorials of various
dates, the latest of which is 1828, viz., “William Heath departed this
life 14 February, 1828 aged 6 weeks.”

Among others of which I made notes in the same churchyard are--

   “_Here Lyeth the Body of John Bin[ns] who Departed this Life
   November the [] 4 1751 Aged 41 years._”

   “Here lieth the body of Samuel Willshaw died th 20 1755 aged 11
   [?]”; at the top are the remains of cherubs’ wings.

   “_Here Lyeth the Body of Thos. Son of William and Mary Rowley
   of Red Street who Died November the 17 in the year 1767 in the 7
   year of His age._”

   “_Here Lieth the Body of Mary Meller who departed this Life
   January the 6th 1750 aged 10._

    _Short was my time
    Grate was my pane
    Weep not for me
    Great is my gaine._”

“Here lieth the Body of Esther Vernon aged 51 1745”;

“Here Lyeth the Bodey of Thomas Coleough aged 70 1737”; and so on.

The other engravings are from Burslem churchyard--the same ground in
which some of the older of the Wedgwoods are buried, and adjoining
which Thomas Wedgwood’s “Churchyard Works” stood when Josiah Wedgwood
was an apprentice there, and still exist. They are early (1737) and
good specimens of these interesting memorials. Another bears the simple
inscription, “Elesbeth Malkin Aged 96: 1745.” Many others of various
dates occur.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Toft._--The name of Toft is intimately connected with pottery,
both in Staffordshire and Derbyshire. The names of Thomas Toft and
Ralph Toft occur on large coarse earthenware dishes of the middle
of the seventeenth century (see vol. i. pages 101 to 104), some of
which are dated. The material of the body of Toft’s dishes platters,
and other domestic articles, is a coarse, reddish, or buff-coloured
clay--a common fire-brick clay--and the patterns are laid on in yellow,
white, or other coloured slip, and then thickly glazed over with a lead
glaze. I have reason to believe that some of the Tofts were potters at
Tickenhall (which see, page 152).

  [Illustration: Fig. 348.

  THOMASTOFT]

  [Illustration: Figs. 349 to 362.--Examples of early Staffordshire
  Wares, Museum of Practical Geology.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Talor._--Apparently contemporary with the Tofts, or at all events
producing precisely the same kind of dishes, &c., was William Talor,
one of whose productions is in the Bateman collection. He was probably
of Staffordshire, and most likely of the same family as the Taylors,
potters of Burslem, in the beginning of last century.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Sans._--Another contemporary of the Tofts was William Sans, whom Shaw
states to have used manganese and pulverised galena in his processes.
The name Thomas Sans also occurs on an example.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Turnor._--Turnor is a name so long and so intimately connected with
potting and Staffordshire, that it is fair to presume Ralph Turnor,
whose name ^{RALPH TURNOR}_{1681} occurs on a tyg of the same general
character as Toft’s dishes, belongs to that county.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Shawe._--Ralph Shawe, of Burslem, “earth potter,” in 1733 took out a
patent for improvements in earthenware (see Vol. I. p. 110). In 1736
he commenced an action for infringement of his patent right, against
John Mitchell, an extensive potter of the same town, but was defeated
(p. 111). He removed with his family into France, where he carried on
his trade, but his family, about 1750, returned to Burslem. About 1710
Aaron Shaw was a maker of stone and dipped wares in Burslem, with a
house adjoining his works; and Moses Shaw (surely two brothers, Aaron
and Moses!) made stone and freckled goods at the same place, with a
house in the middle of the town.

       *       *       *       *       *

_John Mitchell._--In 1736, this potter having succeeded in producing
ware very similar to that of Ralph Shawe, an action was commenced
against him by Shawe for infringing his patent. This was tried at
Stafford, but the defendant, being fully supported by his pottery
neighbours, gained the verdict, the judge concluding with the
memorable words, “Go home, potters, and make whatever kind of pots
you like.” Aaron Wood was at one time employed by Mitchell, whose
principal productions were white stoneware and salt-glazed ware. In
1743 an agreement was entered into between Aaron Wood, of Burslem,
“earth-potter,” and John Mitchell, of the same town, “earth potter,” by
which the former bound himself to the latter for seven years at 7_s._
a week, and 10_s._ 6_d._ on each 11th November.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Cartwright._--The name CARTWRIGHT is stated by Shaw to occur on some
butter-pots, along with the date 1640. This maker, Cartwright, at
his death, in 1658, gave twenty pounds yearly to the poor of Burslem
for ever. Burslem, which, as I have already shown, was famed for its
butter-pots (in 1670 these were ordered to be made to contain not less
than 14 lbs., and to be of hard quality), was to some extent known as
the “butter-pot manufactory.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_Rich._--Shaw (1829) describes a crouch-ware dish, bearing the name W.
RICH, 1702.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Wood._--Ralph Wood, of Burslem, was a potter in the first half of last
century. He was probably brother of Aaron Wood, and son of Ralph Wood,
miller, of Burslem. Specimens of his ware, which is of the same general
character as Whieldon’s, bear the mark ^{Ra. Wood}_{Burslem} and others
R. WOOD, or “Ra. Wood.” Aaron Wood, son of “Ralph Wood, of Burslem,
in the county of Stafford, miller,” was apprenticed in 1731, to “Dr.
Thomas Wedgwood, of Burslem, potter;” the indentures being dated the
23rd August in that year.[46]

When out of his time Wood continued with the same master, Dr. Wedgwood,
for five years, at five shillings per week. Afterwards he worked
principally at making moulds for the then very fashionable embossed
ware, erroneously known as “Elizabethan ware” (at which he was
remarkably clever), for Thomas Whieldon and others. He next engaged,
as already stated, in 1743, with John Mitchell, of Burslem, a rival of
Dr. Thos. Wedgwood, to work solely for him for seven years, at seven
shillings a week, and half-a-guinea every 11th November. About 1750
he began business for himself in making salt-glazed white stoneware
or crouch-ware. Dying about 1780, he was succeeded by his youngest
son Enoch Wood, “the Father of Pottery” as he is sometimes called.
Enoch Wood was a good practical potter, and a modeller of no little
skill for the period. In 1781 he produced a bust of John Wesley (who
used to stay at his house when in the Potteries, and sat to him for
the purpose) which became very popular. He was at one time joined
in partnership by Mr. James Caldwell, under the style of “Wood and
Caldwell” (which see). In the early part of this century Mr. Wood
formed, at considerable labour, a collection of pottery, which, after
his death, was dispersed; some of his specimens are in the Museum of
Practical Geology, and others in the Dresden Museum. The firm in 1792
was carried on as “Enoch Wood & Co.,” and later on, after he took his
son into partnership, “Enoch Wood & Sons.” The marks, so far as I am
aware, used by Enoch Wood are E. WOOD, or ENOCH WOOD, or ENOCH WOOD &
CO., and later on, ENOCH WOOD & SONS impressed in the body of the ware.
The firm was succeeded by Messrs. Pinder, Bourne, and Hope.

  [Illustration: Figs. 363 to 365.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Wood and Caldwell._--This firm (Enoch Wood and James Caldwell)
produced earthenware of very superior character, both in ordinary
articles and services of various kinds. Some of their tea-pots were of
admirable design and excellent workmanship. Busts and small statuettes
were also extensively made, as were highly ornamented candlesticks.
Good examples are found in the Jermyn Street Museum. The usual marks,
impressed, are

    WOOD & CALDWELL            or WOOD & CALDWELL.
      BURSLEM
    _Staffordshire_

Mr. Caldwell, who, I believe, was a “sleeping-partner,” was one of the
executors under the will of Josiah Wedgwood. He married a daughter of
Thomas Stamford (half brother to Mary Stamford, wife of Thomas Bentley,
the partner of Wedgwood), and by her was father of the late gifted and
popular authoress of “Emilia Wyndham,” &c., Mrs. Marsh-Caldwell, of
Linley Wood.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Illustration: Fig. 366.--The Churchyard Works, Burslem.]

_The Churchyard Works._--The Churchyard Works, at the house adjoining
which Josiah Wedgwood was born, and where he was apprenticed to his
brother Thomas, form the north-east boundary of the “churchyard” of
the old church at Burslem. Since that time they have naturally been
much altered and enlarged, but the site is the same, and some of the
buildings now there are what stood and were used in his day. The house
in which he was born, taken down many years ago, stood near where
the present slip-house stands, but its site has since been occupied
by fresh buildings. New hovels and other buildings have, of late
years, been added to the establishment, which is now a very complete
and commodious manufactory. These works, for several generations,
belonged to the Wedgwoods, and are described in 1698 as belonging to
Thomas Wedgwood, “of the Churchyard House,” to whom they appear to
have passed on his father’s death, who was also a potter. His son
Thomas, eldest brother of Josiah, inherited this property on his
father’s death in 1739, and three years later, on his marriage with
Isabel Beech, by marriage settlement dated 12th of October, 1742 (in
which he is described as Thomas Wedgwood, of the Over House, Burslem,
Potter), “the messuage, with the appurtenances situate and adjoining
the churchyard, Burslem, and all outhouses, _work_ houses, &c., then
in the occupation of the said Thomas Wedgwood, or his under tenants,”
were settled upon the children of this marriage. On the death of Thomas
Wedgwood, in 1772, this and other property descended to his son Thomas,
of the Over House, subject to portions to his younger children, under
the settlement of 1742. The works were for some time carried on, along
with the “Bell Works” and “Ivy House Works,” by Josiah Wedgwood. On his
removal to Etruria, they were occupied by his second cousin, Joseph
Wedgwood (brother of Aaron, and nephew of the Aaron Wedgwood who was
partner with William Littler in the first manufacture of porcelain in
the district), who lived at the house now the Mitre Hotel, near the
works. This Joseph Wedgwood, who made jasper and other fine bodies
under the direction of and for Josiah, occupied the works until the
time of their sale to Mr. Green, when he removed to Basford Bank.
About 1780 “the Churchyard premises were sold to Josiah Wedgwood,
then of Etruria, who in 1787 conveyed them to his brother John, also
of Etruria, who in 1795 sold them to Thomas Green, at which time two
newly-erected houses near the potwork were included in the sale.”
Mr. Green manufactured earthenware at these works, and for some time
resided at the house near the works, now known as the Mitre Hotel,
which had been built by one of the Wedgwood family. The property
remained in Thomas Green’s hands until his bankruptcy in 1811, when it
appears to have been purchased by a manufacturer named Joynson, from
whom it passed, some years later on, to Mr. Mosely. While in his hands,
the potwork was held by various tenants, and until about 1858 was
let off in small holdings to different potters. About that period Mr.
Bridgwood, of Tunstall, became the tenant of the premises as a general
earthenware manufacturer, and was soon afterwards joined in partnership
by Mr. Edward Clarke, whose large practical experience tended much
to increase the reputation of the works. This firm, having taken a
lease of the premises, remodelled many of the buildings, and erected
others, and greatly improved the whole place by bringing to bear many
improvements in body unknown and unthought of by their predecessors.
After Mr. Bridgwood’s decease, which took place in 1864, these works,
and the large establishment at Tunstall, were carried on by the
surviving partner, Mr. Clarke, until after a time he ceased working
them, when they passed into other hands as his tenants. The manufactory
was afterwards again carried on by Mr. Clarke in partnership with Mr.
Josiah Wood (a descendant of Aaron Wood), who is referred to under the
head of Poole, Stanway, and Wood, under the style of Wood and Clarke.
The productions of the Churchyard Works, while carried on by Mr.
Clarke, were opaque porcelain of the finest and hardest quality (known
as “white granite”), for the American market, and ordinary earthenware
of the finest quality in the usual services; many of the services,
&c., being embossed in excellently designed patterns, and others
artistically painted and gilt. One of the notable features was artists’
goods (palettes, tiles, slabs, saucers, &c.), and door furniture, both
black, white, and highly gilt and decorated. The impressed mark was
“Bridgwood and Clarke,” and the printed mark a royal arms, with the
words “Porcelain Opaque, B & C, Burslem.”

In 1874, Mr. W. E. Withinshaw entered upon the Churchyard Works, and
since then has greatly improved them, and raised their productions
to a high order of merit. His productions consist of dinner, tea,
toilet, and other services; vases, jugs, tea-pots, kettles, and jug
stands; trinket and fancy articles; candlesticks, and all the usual
varieties of useful and ornamental goods, both plain, printed, painted,
enamelled, and gilt. In toilet designs Mr. Withinshaw is particularly
successful, many of the designs being novel in character, striking
in conception, and beautiful in point of manipulative decoration.
Notably among these is a service in which the head of the elephant is
utilised in a very pleasing manner to form the handle of the ewer; the
head itself forming the top of the handle, and the trunk the part for
grasping. This is, in some of the services, produced in mass gold,
with a rich and striking, but at the same time simple and elegant,
effect. Other designs of this firm are of equal excellence. In vases,
Mr. Withinshaw produces some admirable designs, the outlines of which
are faultless, and the decoration well and judiciously managed. The
quality of the ware is far above the average, and gives the productions
a high standing among those of the locality. In jet ware, all the usual
articles--tea-pots, kettles, jugs, spill cases, &c.--are made, and in
endless variety of style; all being equally good in body, in glaze, and
in decoration.

Another speciality of these works is now, as in former days, door
furniture. The plates are remarkable for their evenness and flatness of
surface, and for the taste displayed in the patterns which adorn them;
they are made both in white and in black, and of every possible style
of decoration. Umbrella, walking-stick, kettle, machine, and every
other kind of handles, as well as other china articles used by cabinet
brassfitters, are made.

The mark, impressed in the body of the ware, is W. E. WITHINSHAW. On
the dinner ware the name of the pattern is given on printed marks, with
the initials W. E. W.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Bell Works._--The Bell Works, of which, as they appeared in 1865,
I give an engraving, Fig. 367, was, at the time when the great Josiah
Wedgwood entered on its occupancy, the property of Mr. John Bourne,
an army contractor, in the neighbouring town of Newcastle. From him
the property, about the year 1771, passed to his grandson, Mr. John
Adams, of Cobridge, and in 1847 the estate again passed by will into
the hands of the late Mr. Isaac Hitchen, of Alsager. The pot-works were
occupied by Josiah Wedgwood, as tenant to Mr. John Bourne, until his
removal to Etruria. The next tenant was, I believe, Mr. William Bourne,
an earthenware manufacturer, who held them for some years, and was
tenant in 1809. Mr. Bourne afterwards entered into partnership with a
potter named Cormie, and the works were carried on under the style of
“Bourne and Cormie.” In 1836, the works having then remained for some
time unoccupied, were divided, a portion being taken by Messrs. Beech
and Jones as an earthenware manufactory, another portion taken away
for the building of the present Independent Chapel, which was erected
on its site in the following year; and other parts were let off to
various holders for different purposes apart from the pot trade. In
1839, the partnership between Messrs. Beech and Jones was dissolved,
the former gentleman alone continuing to occupy the same portion of the
premises, in which he produced china and earthenware figures. In 1846
Mr. Beech, having increased his business, became tenant of the whole
of the remaining premises, with the exception of that part occupied by
Mr. Dean’s printing-office, &c., and in 1853 took into partnership Mr.
Brock, which firm, however, only lasted a couple of years. In 1855,
Mr. Brock went out of the concern, and from that date Mr. William
Beech carried on the manufactory until his death, which took place in
1864. It was next carried on by Messrs. Beech and Podmore; but in 1876
a part of the premises was purchased by the Board of Health for the
purpose of building a covered market on the site, and the remainder was
bought by Mr. George Beardmore of Rode Heath and taken down; thus these
historically interesting works have been brought to a close.

  [Illustration: Fig. 367.--The Bell Works, Burslem.]

At these “Bell Works” Josiah Wedgwood turned his attention more
especially to the production of the fine and delicate descriptions of
earthenware which soon earned for him the proud distinction of “Queen’s
Potter.”

The Bell Works were situated at the corner of Brick House Street and
Queen Street, very near to the new Wedgwood Institution, but in the
time of Josiah Wedgwood, Brick House Street was not formed, but was
a part of the ground belonging to the manufactory, and was, indeed,
waste land, covered with “shard rucks,” and other unmistakable evidence
of the potter’s art. Queen Street then, too, was little better than a
lane, but was dignified with the name of _Queen_ Street, through
Wedgwood being there appointed _Queen’s_ potter, and there making
his celebrated _Queen’s_ ware.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Red Lion Works._--These were carried on by Dr. Thomas Wedgwood, and
took their name from their contiguity to the Red Lion Inn.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Big House._--The pottery adjoining this house, at the corner of
Wedgwood Street and the Market Place, passing down Swan Square,
belonged to Thomas and John Wedgwood; the works have long ceased to be
used, and are converted into builder’s premises.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Ivy House_ and works, so called from the fact of the house being
covered with ivy, was situated where the butchers’ shambles now stand,
the old buildings having been purchased by the market commissioners,
and taken down for the erection of the present market in 1835. These
premises belonged to Thomas and John Wedgwood, of the “Big House,” to
whom Josiah became tenant, covenanting by written agreement to pay
for the house and the potwork attached to it the yearly rent of ten
pounds. The “Ivy House” and works were situated nearly in the centre
of Burslem, at the corner of what was then known as _Shoe Lane_, or
_Shore Lane_, now called _Wedgwood Street_, which at that time was a
narrow way, only wide enough for a single cart to pass along, and as
rough and uneven as well could be. The visitor to Burslem who desires
to know exactly the site of this historically interesting house, should
stroll up to the fine modern-built shambles, or “butchery” as it is
sometimes called, and while he stands at the corner facing down Swan
Square, he may rest assured that he is standing on what was the little
enclosed garden in front of Wedgwood’s house; that the outer wall of
the building at his back goes diagonally across the house from corner
to corner, one half being under the shambles and the other where the
street now is; that the site of one of the kilns is just beneath the
centre of the shambles; and that another kiln was about the middle of
the present street at his back; the surrounding workshops being partly
where the street now is and partly where the building at present stands.

  [Illustration: Fig. 368.--The Ivy House, Burslem.]

The “Ivy House” might originally have been roofed with thatch or mud,
like the other buildings of the district, but it was afterwards tiled,
as shown in the engraving. In front was a small garden enclosed with
a low wall, and a brick pathway led from the gate to the doorway. The
front faced the open space called the “Green Bank,” and adjoining was
a low, half-timbered, thickly-thatched building, afterwards known as
the “Turk’s Head,” and beyond this again was the maypole, on “Maypole
Bank,” on the site now occupied by the Town Hall. At the opposite side
of the house from the Turk’s Head was a gateway leading into the yard
of the works, which made up one side of Shoe Lane, the pot-works of
John and Thomas Wedgwood, with which they were connected, being on the
opposite side of the lane. These works and house have the reputation of
being the first roofed with tiles in the district--the usual roofing
being thatch, or oftener still, mud. At the Ivy House Josiah Wedgwood
carried on the manufacture of his ornamental goods, his more ordinary
ware, I believe, being produced at the Churchyard. At the Ivy House
works he produced many things far in advance of his day, and to the Ivy
House itself he brought home his bride, and there lived happily with
her for several years.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Lakin and Poole._--Messrs. Lakin and Poole were in business in
Burslem, and doing a very extensive trade, at the latter end of the
last century. Their billhead in October, 1792, was simply “Burslem,
Staffordshire, Bought of Lakin & Poole,” and in the front of the
heading was a garter and star, surrounding a vase, on which was
“Manufacturers of Staffordshire Earthenware. Table Services Enamelled
or Painted with Arms, &c., &c.” On the garter “Burnished gold got up
as in London.”[47] In 1793 (July) a new billhead was used--“Burslem,
Staffordshire, Bought of Lakin and Poole. Blue Painted Table Services,
&c., and Coloured in all its various Branches.” At the front is a
standing figure of Commerce, with an anchor, against which is an oval
tablet with “Table Services Enamelled with Arms, Crests, Cyphers, &c.,
&c.,” to which the figure is pointing. In many of the billheads I have
seen the word “Painted” is altered to “Printed” with a pen, and the
word “Ware” is written between (over) “coloured” and “in.” This heading
was used till the early part of 1794.[48] In December, 1794, they used
a written billhead. On the 14th of February, 1795, it is announced in a
letter that “Mr. Thomas Shrigley[49] has joined us in our manufactory
of Earthenware, and that for the future the business will be carried
on under the firm of _Poole, Lakin and Shrigley_.” In May, 1795, the
billhead (written) is “Burslem, Bought of Lakin, Poole & Shrigley,”
the managing man being R. B. Swift. This firm continued until the end
of 1795, but in January, 1796, another change took place, the firm
now being simply “Poole and Shrigley”--Mr. Lakin either having died or
withdrawn. The billheads were still written. T. Kempe was managing man
in February, 1796. The last account I have is up to February, 1796.

During this period (1792 to 1796) the goods manufactured by them, as
appears in these invoices, are as follows:--cream-colour, blue-printed,
fawn-colour, black, stone, and other wares; “oval concave dishes of
various sizes, flatt plates, soups, twifflers, muffins, tureen compots,
sauce ditto, boats and stands, root dishes, cover dishes, sallads,
bakers, dessert services of various patterns, ewers and basins, cups
and saucers, bowls, cream-jugs, tea-pots, chocolates, flower-horns,
flower-pots, jugs, sugar-boxes, double-handled coffee cups, salad
dishes, sauce boats, gravy pots, candlesticks, baskets and stands,
black tea-pots, mugs, figures in great variety, mortars, cheese
toasters, raddish dishes, paste pots, tripe pots, Mocoa tumblers,
candlestick vases, bow pots, hand vases, French pies, English pies,
stone jugs with and without figures, fawn-coloured porter mugs, blue
printed dishes and other articles, egg-cups, custards and covers,”
&c. The products of this manufactory were of very superior character
both as regards the quality of the various bodies, and the modelling,
painting, and artistic decoration of the articles. The blackware, in
imitation of Wedgwood’s basalts, is remarkably good, and many of the
figures and services are of good character.

The mark of the firm was usually simply the words LAKIN & POOLE
impressed in the body of the ware. On one or two examples the name
LAKIN only occurs, and on others R. POOLE.

After the death of Mr. Lakin, presumably the potter named above, his
widow, in 1824, published a book of his recipes, of which the following
is a note:--

   “Potting, Enamelling, and Glass Staining.--The valuable Receipts
   of the late Mr. Thomas Lakin, with proper and necessary
   directions for their preparation and use in the manufacture of
   Porcelain Earthenware, and Iron Stone China, together with the
   most recent and valuable improvements in the advanced art of
   Glass Staining and Painting. Leeds: Printed for Mrs. Lakin, by
   Edward Baines. 1824.” Such was its title.

   The Preface, which is very explanatory, is as follows:--“The
   progressive improvements in the manufacture of Porcelain and
   Earthenware, during the last thirty years, have raised this art
   to an eminence which it never reached before in the British
   Empire; and, perhaps, in no department of art has scientific
   research and experiment been so productive of wealth and fame
   as in this, and it is no undue encomium on the industry of the
   manufacturer to state, that the consumption at home and the
   demands from abroad have kept pace with the improvements which
   have increased both. The important station which this art holds
   amongst our manufactures renders every attempt at improvement
   worthy of consideration and attention. It has been said, the man
   who causes one ear of corn to grow where one never grew before,
   deserves the thanks of his country; but what does that man
   merit who, by indefatigable industry, contributes materially
   to the advancement of the interests of his country, in the
   improvement of its manufactures? It was in this class that the
   late MR. THOMAS LAKIN held a situation much above
   mediocrity, for, in Staffordshire, it is well known that few men
   have contributed more to the improvement of an art so useful and
   so much admired. The following work is the result of upwards of
   thirty years of labour, study, and repeated experiment, and no
   pains have been spared in arranging the various Receipts in such
   a chain of connection as to render them easy of comprehension
   to an intelligent operator. The Subscribers may rest assured,
   that the whole of the following Receipts may be individually
   depended upon as genuine, each having been repeatedly tried in
   the course of the author’s long experience. Mr. Lakin had also
   extensive practice in the admired art of Staining and Painting
   Glass; several windows of exquisite workmanship were executed by
   him during the time he was engaged with John Davenport, Esq.,
   for some of the first noblemen in the kingdom. The Receipts,
   together with the method of using them, are therefore laid down
   from actual experiment, and it is hoped will be found extremely
   valuable. In presenting the following work to the subscribers,
   Mrs. Lakin is anxious to express her gratitude for the liberal
   encouragement she has met with, and for the highly gratifying
   tribute they have paid to the abilities of her departed husband;
   but to the kindness of those gentlemen who had before purchased
   some of the Receipts at a price far beyond the whole charge of
   this work, and yet have become subscribers, she feels herself
   particularly indebted. Mrs. L. respectfully solicits of the
   subscribers not to permit persons who are not purchasers to
   copy any of the Receipts, as it might not only injure her as
   proprietor of the copyright, but also other subscribers; on her
   part she pledges herself not to publish the work, nor permit the
   work to be published, at a lower price than that at which it is
   now offered to the subscribers.” The work extends to 86 pages,
   and contains 136 processes connected with potting, enamels, and
   glass-staining. The receipts are evidently the compilation of a
   greatly experienced and very intelligent potter.

  [Illustration: Fig. 369.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 370.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Waterloo Potteries._--These works were carried on in the latter part
of last century by Walter Daniel, who was succeeded by Messrs. Timothy
and John Lockett; the manufacture at that time being principally
salt-glazed ware. About 1809 the premises were purchased by Joseph
Machin and Jacob Baggaley, and carried on by them for the making
of china and ordinary earthenware. In 1831 Mr. Machin died and was
succeeded by his son Mr. William Machin and partners. The works next
passed into the hands of Mr. Richard Daniel, and next to Mr. Thomas
Edwards. In 1850 they were purchased by Messrs. T. and R. Boote, who
still occupy and work them.

  [Illustration: Fig. 371.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 372 to 374.]

In 1843 Messrs. Boote took out a patent for “Certain improvements
in pottery and mosaic work.” These consist in producing “coloured
designs on grounds of different colours, as black on white or white
on black. First, the designs are made from a mould, as in figuring,
and laid on the moulds for making the ware; the ground colour is then
put on. Second, the design, cut in paper, parchment, &c., is laid in
the moulds and the halves fastened together, the colour to form the
ground is poured in, after which the paper, &c., are removed and other
colour poured in to fill its place. Third, producing different coloured
raised surfaces. The figures in low relief in the inside of the moulds
are filled with a composition, the halves of the moulds fastened
together, and the slip poured in to form a thin coating, which was
then supplemented with an inner lining of a cheaper material to form a
substratum, thus producing mosaic and other elaborate designs. In this
process the excess of liquid is withdrawn when the necessary thickness
is attained.

  [Illustration: Fig. 375.]

In 1857 Messrs Thomas Latham Boote and Richard Boote took out a patent
for “Improvements in the manufacture of ornamental pottery, and
articles made from clay and other like plastic materials.” “A thin
piece of metal or other suitable substance, which forms the outline of
the design, is fixed on the flattened clay intended to form the article
then being made. The hollow parts are then filled up with the coloured
clay or clays which are to form the design. The piece of metal is next
removed, and the flattened clay with the design upon it is put in the
mould to form the article. In some cases that part of the mould which
is to correspond to the groundwork of the article to be manufactured
is made to rise by springs or other means, suitable coloured clay is
put into the hollow parts of the mould thus formed, and the clay to
form the body is put in and the whole is pressed;” or the parts of the
mould corresponding to the ornaments may be raised and the ground part
filled in. We give three examples produced by one of those processes,
Figs. 369 to 371. The effect in many instances was very pleasing,
and gave the appearance of relief, without, however, the pattern
being at all raised. Parian was also formerly largely produced and of
considerable excellence, both in vases, jugs, figures, both single and
in groups, and other objects. One of the most effective groups is that
of “Repentance, Faith, and Resignation,” modelled by Mr. Gillard. (Fig.
375.)

  [Illustration: Figs. 376 and 377.]

Among the Parian vases formerly produced at the Waterloo Works were
some the body of which was buff and the raised flowers in white; thus
producing a very pleasing and softened effect.

All these decorative classes of goods have been discontinued by Messrs.
Boote, who now confine themselves to the production of the ordinary
white graniteware for the American markets, and encaustic and other
glazed and unglazed pavement tiles. For these latter the firm are
patentees of a process for inlaying encaustic tiles with clay dust--a
process which is also adopted for the manufacture of dishes and other
articles in earthenware in what this firm called “Royal Patent
Ironstone,” and by which, by means of one press alone, as many as 100
dozen plates or small dishes, could be made in a day.

The encaustic and other tiles made by that firm consist of encaustic,
geometrical, and majolica tiles of great variety in pattern and of very
effective combinations of colours.

The marks used by Messrs. Boote are, on their white granite ware, the
impressed initials T & R B.; and the following, printed in
black, viz.--

  [Illustration:

    ROYAL PATENT
    IRONSTONE
    T & R BOOTE

  Fig. 378.]

and another bearing the crest, a greyhound, couchant, collared and
slipped, between two laurel wreaths, and the words--

    T & R BOOTE
    ROYAL PREMIUM
    IRONSTONE

    and above the words TRADE MARK. On the tiles, the name in raised
    letters, T & R BOOTE appears.
              BURSELM

The Jurors’ Report of 1862 says: “The tiles exhibited by this firm are
deserving of high commendation; the designs are well selected; the
equality of surface evidences great efficiency. Messrs. T. and R. Boote
claim some originality in their process, to which this perfection is
not only attributable, but obtained at a much less cost.”

  [Illustration: Fig. 379.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Washington Works._--The business now carried on at this manufactory
originated experimentally in King Street, Burslem, where the late Mr.
William S. Kennedy, about the year 1838, commenced the production of
palettes and other requisites for artists’ use. Shortly afterwards,
removing to a pottery in Bourne’s Bank, he there added to his business
the manufacture of door furniture, letters for signs, &c. With
perseverance, Mr. Kennedy combated the difficulties which these novel
articles presented; and while in conjunction with Mr. William Maddock,
who remained with the firm for thirty-five years, he was successful in
effecting great improvements in the various processes. About 1847, the
manufacture was removed to its present locality, and has from time to
time been enlarged. The marks W. S. KENNEDY and J. MACINTYRE have been
very rarely used.

In 1852 Mr. Kennedy was joined in partnership by his brother-in-law,
Mr. James Macintyre, who shortly afterwards became sole proprietor
of the works. In 1863, Mr. Macintyre patented methods of producing
oval, reeded, octagon, and other forms, by the lathe; and he was ever
alert to devise and apply improvements in mechanism, &c. He succeeded
in the production of a rich cream-coloured body, which, under the
name of “Ivory China,” has held a high reputation, and will always
be honourably associated with the “Washington” Works. In 1867 Mr.
Macintyre produced backs for hair-brushes, hand-mirrors, &c., which
were patented by Mr. J. J. Hicks, and in numerous other instances,
especially for France, the “body” has been used as an ivory substitute.
So far as can be ascertained, the successful application to door
furniture of the earlier invention of the beautiful black, which
is produced by dipping the brownish red _bisque_ in a rich cobalt
glaze, also originated at these works. This “jet,” produced in great
perfection, has been applied in plain, and also with richly gilt and
enamelled ornamentation, not only to door furniture, but more recently
to inkstands and similar goods. Mr. Macintyre, who was a man of public
spirit and great enterprise, was much beloved by his workpeople, and
the annual festive gatherings in which he, his family and friends, met
his employés, obtained a well-merited celebrity. He died in December,
1868, having a few years previously taken into partnership his
confidential manager, Mr. Thomas Hulme, and his son-in-law, Mr. William
Woodall. By these two gentlemen the business is still carried on under
the old title of “James Macintyre and Co.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_Nile Street Works._--These works were built upon the site of an early
pottery; this is evidenced by numbers of early fragments of pitchers,
“porringers,” and other salt-glazed domestic vessels “of red and yellow
clay marbled together,” being found during alterations of the premises
in late years. Messrs. J. and R. Riley removed from here to the Hill
Works, and were, I believe, succeeded by Mr. James Cormie, uncle of
the late Mr. Thomas Pinder (who at one time was a partner in the firm
of Mellor, Venables, and Co.), and great-uncle of the present sole
proprietor of the works, Mr. Shadford Pinder, who trades under the
style of “Pinder, Bourne, and Co.” China was at one time made here, but
the productions have latterly been confined to printed, enamelled, and
gilt earthenware, in which all the usual services are made; stoneware
for telegraphic purposes; fine red ware for useful and ornamental
goods; jet ware in a variety of articles; and sanitary goods. These
they export largely both to the colonial and foreign markets. Messrs.
Pinder, Bourne, and Co.’s ornamental goods, notably their “red ware,”
or terra cotta, is of fine, hard, and durable quality, and much taste
is evinced in some of the designs of its decoration. The vases,
spill-cases, and other articles in this body, richly enamelled and gilt
in arabesque and other patterns, are remarkably good. The jet ware is
also of good quality. Among their specialities in this ware, and in
fine earthenware, are flower vases, and jardinières; some of the latter
being skilfully painted in birds, flowers, &c. Messrs. Pinder, Bourne,
and Co. have patented improvements in ovens and in steam printing
presses; but this latter, having excited the hostility of the workmen
at the time of the riots in 1842, was abandoned. The firm received
medals at the London and Paris Exhibitions of 1851, 1855, and 1867. The
marks used are a circular garter, bearing the name of the pattern and
the initials “P. B. & C^{o.}” surmounted by a crown and encompassed
with a wreath of laurel; and a triangular figure, with the words
“Pinder, Bourne & Co., Nile St., Burslem.”

  [Illustration: Fig. 380.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Newport Pottery._--These works were established at the close of
last century by Mr. Walter Daniel, and about 1810 passed into the hands
of Mr. John Davenport. The manufacture was afterwards carried on by
Messrs. Cork and Edge, and is now continued by Messrs. Edge, Malkin,
& Co., a firm which, with various alterations in partnership, dates
back to the beginning of the present century. Messrs. Cork and Edge,
in their ordinary earthenware, introduced many years ago a process of
inlaying the patterns in the ground body, but of different colours.
These were intended for the cheapest markets, but were produced in
good taste. Three of these designs, two tea-pots and a ewer, shown
at the Great Exhibition of 1851, are engraved on Figs. 381 to 383.
The productions of the firm at the present time are dinner ware; jet,
enamelled, lustre, and other fancy goods; and all the ordinary wares
for the home and foreign markets.

  [Illustration: Figs. 381 to 383.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Newport Works._--Established in 1866 by Malkin, Edge, & Co. for
the manufacture of encaustic and other tiles. The tiles are made from
dust (by the process of Messrs. Boulton and Worthington), by which
process the various colours are fixed in the tile, immediately and
without pressure, in the following manner. “On a level block of iron,
surrounded by an outer casing which is movable, is placed a sheet of
brass with the pattern cut out of the same, and into the different
spaces are put the various coloured clays, in dust, required. A raised
counterpart of the design is then gently pressed upon these dusts, and
the brass sheet, or plate, is removed. The outer casing before referred
to is then raised according to the thickness required, and the space is
filled up with dust to form the body of the tile. A screw, worked by a
wheel, is then lowered upon the outer casing and block, which forces
the out-casing back again to its former position around the level
block, as far as the dust will allow. The tile is then taken out of the
outer casing, and is completely finished, with the exception of being
fired. This screw pressure produces in a few moments a remarkably solid
substance.” Messrs. Malkin, Edge, & Co. produce an extensive variety
of patterns, both in encaustic, wall, and other tiles. The designs are
good and effective, and the colours rich, clear, and well defined.

  [Illustration: Figs. 384 and 385.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 386 and 387.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Dale Hall._--The extensive works at Dale Hall (or Dale Hole, as it
used to be written), founded in 1790, originally belonged to Mr Joseph
Stubbs, a very successful manufacturer, who, having retired from
business, died in 1836. He was succeeded by Messrs. Thomas, John, and
Joshua Mayer, who afterwards traded “as Mayer Brothers and Elliot,”
and from them, successively through the firms of “Liddle, Elliot, &
Co.,” and “Bates, Elliot & Co.,” to the present owners and occupiers,
Messrs. Bates, Walker, and Co.; Mr. Elliot having retired, and Mr.
Walker, stepson to Mr. Bates, being taken into partnership. By the
earlier firms, ordinary earthenware was produced, but under Messrs.
Mayer, who came from Stoke to Dale Hall,[50] rapid strides were made
in art manufactures, and many important improvements effected. They
were exceedingly clever potters, especially Mr. Jos. Mayer, who
died prematurely through excessive study and application to his art.
They introduced many important improvements in the manufacture and
decoration, especially in the beautiful polychromatic bisque printing
which is continued by their successors and other firms. Besides
ordinary earthenware, this firm produced stoneware of a highly vitreous
quality; Parian of an improved body; a fine caneware, in which some
remarkably good jugs (notably the “oak” pattern) were made; and other
wares. In the stoneware, besides many well-modelled jugs and other
articles, they made tea-urns, which they were the first to introduce,
of excellent design and admirable finish. Two of these, made in 1851
(Figs. 384 and 385) I here engrave. The peculiar body of the stoneware
of which they were made was capable of withstanding the variations of
temperature to which vessels of this kind, usually formed of metal,
are liable. These were not made to any extent by Messrs. Mayer, but
are now being reproduced by Messrs. Bates, Walker, & Co. with great
success; they are highly ornate in appearance, and will doubtless come
much into use. Messrs. Mayer also produced some admirable designs
in vases, decorated with a profusion of exquisitely modelled raised
flowers. Two of these are shown on Figs. 386 and 387, and a jug in the
following figure. The dinner plates, dishes, &c., of Messrs. Mayer,
were characterized by an excellent “fit” in nesting, by lightness of
body, and by neatness of finish in decoration. In 1851 they received a
medal for their exhibits, and again in the New York Exhibition of 1853
and the Paris Exhibition of 1855 medals were awarded.

  [Illustration: Fig. 388.]

The present firm of Bates, Walker, & Co., produce perhaps a larger
variety of manufactured articles than any other one house in the trade.
In earthenware, dinner, tea, toilet, and other services, and every
variety of article of use and of ornament, are made; and the other
wares are ironstone, opaque porcelain, jet, stone, &c. In tableware,
whether in dinner, breakfast, or tea-services, every variety of
style, from the plain white, ordinary printed, and flown, to the most
elaborately enamelled, painted, and gilt patterns made The jugs, too,
are a speciality; of these there are an immense variety of excellent
shapes, and of strikingly beautiful decoration. The same remark will
apply to the toilet services, which are, as a rule, characterized
by good form and artistic decoration; of these, the “Mistletoe”
pattern is one of the most simply elegant yet produced. Among other
articles in earthenware, the richly ornamented spirit barrels form a
distinct feature. In stoneware, of which I have spoken, well designed
and sharply executed pressed patterns, in jugs, tea-pots, and other
articles, are made in great variety.

  [Illustration: Figs. 389 and 390.]

In terra cotta, Messrs. Bates, Walker, and Co. produce statuary groups,
figures, and busts of remarkably good design and of artistic finish.
The body is of a somewhat similar character to that of the Watcombe
ware, but the process is different. The Watcombe “is fired in the
enamel kiln or in an oven not subjected to greater heat, while this
is fired in the biscuit oven; the one is so soft that it may be cut
with a knife, while the other is quite vitreous and hard.” In this
material--a clay found near the works--the firm produce a large variety
of subjects, and a selection of these formed a notable feature in
the Philadelphia Exhibition of 1876. Among the subjects are “Peace”
and “War,” and “Time unveiling Truth,” by Grispie; “The Fighting
Gladiator,” “The Bath,” “The Young Apollo,” and other subjects from the
antique; “Flora,” “Pomona,” “Washington,” and other pieces by Beattie;
Flaxman’s “Wine” and “Water” vases; the “Crowning of Esther,” “The
Lorelei Syren,” “The Seasons,” “The Elements,” &c.

  [Illustration: Figs. 391 to 397.]

Another speciality of the firm is what they have named their “Turner
Jasper Ware.” This consists of a terra-cotta body, with a slip of
various colours--green, blue, chocolate, buff, &c.--decorated with
bas-reliefs, many of which are Flaxman’s designs, as used by Turner at
his famous works of last century. Of a large number of these old Turner
moulds, Messrs. Bates, Walker, and Co. are the fortunate possessors,
and they are reproducing them in a variety of ways and with good
effect, although their body wants the fineness, hardness, and compact
character of the old Turner ware.

  [Illustration: Figs. 398 and 399.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 400 to 403.]

Among other goods produced by Dale Hall are artists’ palettes, slabs,
tiles, mullers, &c.; photographic articles (trays, baths, troughs,
stands, funnels, and every other requisite); chemical and druggists’
goods (mortars and pestles, leech-jars, covered jars, evaporating pans,
inhalers, pill tiles, and every other article); scent bottles and
vases; toilet and other boxes; sign-board letters; door furniture;
ironmongers’ fittings; and fancy articles of various kinds. Garden
and ornamental flower-pots, garden-seats, suspenders, fern and other
stands, &c., are also made. In sanitary ware, Messrs. Bates, Walker, &
Co. rank very high, and produce every known article and of faultless
excellence in quality. They are patentees of an improved “wedge commode
pan,” the principle of which is shown in Fig. 398; its advantage in
the sick chamber or travelling carriage being very apparent. Another
and very important patent taken out by the firm, is for self-locking
and self-adjusting covers for jugs, tea-pots, &c. The principle,
which is one of the most simple, but at the same time most successful
yet adopted for preventing the falling off of the lid in the act of
pouring, is shown in Figs. 400 to 403. One of the great specialities
of the firm is the process by which printing in two to five colours is
successfully transferred on to the ware while in biscuit state, and is,
therefore, under the glaze. By this process, the invention of Messrs.
Mayer Brothers, vases, dinner and other services, and other articles,
are decorated in thoroughly good taste; and, through there being no
touching whatever by the pencil, as the entire pattern is transferred
at one operation from the coloured print, they are produced at a
comparatively moderate cost. The effect is soft and delicate, and is
capable of considerable development.

  [Illustration: Fig. 404.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 405.]

The marks of Messrs. Mayer were T. J & J MAYER; MAYER BROS, &c. Those
of the present firm are BATES, WALKER & CO. PATENTEES, on an oval
ribbon, with date, &c., of registration inside; and a nude figure
kneeling and holding an ewer in front of him, on a tablet with the date
1790. This is introduced in a variety of ways, with the initials B. W.
& CO., and the name of the pattern, &c. The markets supplied are both
home and foreign.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Dale Hall Pottery._--The extensive works of Messrs. James Edwards
and Son are the oldest existing works in Dale Hall. They belonged to
Messrs. John and George Rogers (brothers) till 1815, when the latter
died, and Mr. Spencer Rogers having joined his father, the business was
carried on under the style of John Rogers and Son. In 1816 Mr. John
Rogers died, leaving £1,000 to the North Staffordshire Infirmary, and
other charitable bequests. He had erected a handsome residence, “The
Watlands,” near Wolstanton. The firm continued as John Rogers and Son
until 1842, when the manufactory was purchased by the late Mr. James
Edwards, formerly of the firm of James and Thomas Edwards of the
Kiln-Croft Works. Messrs. Rogers produced tableware of a higher and
better quality than most of their contemporaries, and were especially
famed for their light blue “Broseley” or “Willow” pattern services. The
mark used by them appears to have been simply the name ROGERS
impressed in or printed on the ware; sometimes with the addition of the
sign of Mars or Iron

  [Illustration: ♂

  ROGERS]

Mr. James Edwards was entirely a self-made man, and was one of those
bright examples of indomitable perseverance, unflinching rectitude,
steadiness of purpose, and genuine benevolence, which crop up every now
and then among our most successful manufacturers. Commencing simply
as a thrower at Messrs. Rogers, he became a manager at Philips’s of
Longport, and at John Alcock’s of Cobridge, then commenced business
in partnership with John Maddock, and afterwards, in partnership with
his brother Thomas Edwards, carried on business in Sylvester Square,
Burslem, and next in partnership with Mr. John Maddock, in the same
town. In 1842 he purchased the manufactory of Messrs. Rogers and Son,
where he commenced entirely on his own account. By him the manufactory
was considerably enlarged and extended; a flint-mill erected; new
machinery of the most approved construction (including steam jiggers,
lathes, jollies, throwing-wheels, and Needham and Kite’s patent
pressing machines for preparing clay by filtration) put up, patent
stoves and pug-mills erected, and the whole place so increased as to be
enabled to produce fully six times the amount of ware it was capable of
doing when he first entered upon it.

By these improvements much of the heavy drudgery of labour both to
children and adults was saved. In these works, too, the whole of the
rooms containing the machinery are heated by steam, and kept at one
uniform temperature. To Mr. Edwards the white graniteware, which has
now become so important a feature in the Pottery district, mainly owes
its excellence; that made by him being considered to be all that could
be desired by our transatlantic brethren, and to be the standard of
perfection to which the aims of other houses were directed. In 1851
a medal was awarded to Mr. Edwards, and an additional certificate of
merit, for beauty of form and excellence of goods exhibited. At the
New York Exhibition they also received honourable mention, and in
1865 a prize medal was awarded for electrical, chemical, galvanic, and
photographic apparatus in both ironstone and earthenware. Mr. Edwards,
who had taken his son Mr. Richard Edwards into partnership, retired
from the concern in 1861, and died, full of honours, as a magistrate
and otherwise, in January, 1867,--one of his last acts of thoughtful
benevolence being that of (only a few days before his death) sending
to a number of his old workpeople at the manufactory cheques varying
in amount from £20 to £100 each, according to each one’s length of
service. The works are now carried on by Mr. Richard Edwards under the
style of “James Edwards and Son.”

The productions consist of white graniteware for the American and
steamship trade; ordinary earthenware for the home trade, in which
all the usual services, &c., are made; Indian ironstone goods; and
electrical, chemical, galvanic, and photographic appliances. These are
all of the highest quality, and are much in repute. In “stone china,”
which is of good firm semi-transparent quality, many excellent patterns
are made. Among these are the “bishop,” “barley,” “mediæval,” “rope,”
“tulip,” “scroll,” and others.

The marks used by the firm, June, 1842, are as follows. The royal arms
above the name

                              STONE CHINA
                          JAMES EDWARDS & SON
                               DALE HALL

The same, with the addition, beneath, of the trade mark, a dolphin
entwined round an anchor. The initials _J E & S_ in writing letters,
surrounded by a circular garter bearing the words IRONSTONE CHINA.

    The name J EDWARDS & SON surrounded by an oval garter bearing
                DALE HALL
    the words IRONSTONE CHINA. And Dalehall surrounded by a similar
    oval garter bearing the name JAMES EDWARDS & SON. An impressed
    mark of EDWARDS is also used.
             D H

       *       *       *       *       *

_Dale Hall Brick and Tile Company._--These works belong to the
Brownhills Pottery Company (see page 288, _pcst._) and produce all the
usual classes of plain and ornamental goods.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Dale Hall Tile Works._--These Tile Works are carried on by Mr. James
P. Basford, whose grandfather, above half a century ago, worked the
same field of clay. His productions are all the usual classes of plain
and ornamental tiles, bricks, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Albert Street Works._--These works were established by Mr. John
Hawthorne in 1854, who continued them until 1869, when they were taken
by Messrs. Wiltshaw, Wood, & Co., and are now carried on by William
Wood & Co.; they were among the earliest in this branch of trade. The
goods made are door plates, lock furniture, &c., both in white, black,
gilt, and painted; drawer, shutter, and other knobs in oak, white,
black, &c.; bedstead vases; caster bowls; umbrella, walking-stick,
sewing-machine, closet, and other handles; inkstands, bottles, and
wells; highly decorated jam-pots and biscuit-jars for the table;
match-pots; teapot and urn stands of various degrees of decoration,
painted, gilt, and enamelled; and every description of china used
by brass-founders, tin-plate workers, japanners, &c. Most of these
articles are of good quality in body, and excellent glaze and finish,
and the colours--white, black, ivory, oak, brown, turquoise, green, and
blue--in which they are produced are clear and effective. The only mark
used is W W & CO.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Mersey Pottery._--Established in 1850 by its present owner, Mr.
Anthony Shaw. Goods specially adapted for the various American markets
are made: the specialities being white graniteware and cream-coloured
wares for the United States; the same with the addition of printed,
lustred, and painted goods for South America, and printed for the
colonies. In 1855 Mr. Shaw was awarded a medal at the Paris Exhibition.
The mark used is the royal arms, with ribbon bearing the words STONE
CHINA, and beneath,

                               WARRANTED
                             ANTHONY SHAW
                                BURSLEM

The works were rebuilt on a very extensive scale in 1866, and are
looked upon as a model manufactory, in which are brought to bear all
the latest improvements in the art of pottery.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Steel._--A manufacturer named Moses Steel had a potwork in Burslem in
1715, and made the ordinary clouded ware of the period. Another potter
of the same name, probably his descendant, carried on business in the
latter part of the same century; he produced a fine earthenware and an
imitation jasperware. The works are still standing by Queen Street, and
are known as “Bournes Bank.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_John Maddock and Son_ manufacture white graniteware for the American
markets to a large extent.

       *       *       *       *       *

_New Wharf Pottery_--(Hollinshed and Kirkham, late J. Daniel
& Co.)--Printed ware of the kinds required for the home, Russian,
Italian, and French markets, and all the usual kinds of painted and
Paris white wares suitable for the African, Australian, and American
trades.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Overhouse Works_--Wedgwood Place.--The old works, now, alas!
taken down, were possessed of no ordinary degree of interest, from the
fact of the “Overhouse,” the residence which closely adjoins them,
having been the property and residence of Thomas Wedgwood, the eldest
brother of Josiah Wedgwood (to whom Josiah was bound apprentice),
and having been in the possession of the Wedgwood family for some
generations. The old works were situated at the back and side of
the “Overhouse,” with entrance in Wedgwood Place, where that street
joins Scotia Road. A doorway, over which was a tablet, now no longer
in existence, connected the works with the house. This historically
interesting but now lost relic is represented by Fig. 407.

The Overhouse works were occupied, early in the present century by
Messrs. Goodfellow and Bathwell, who were succeeded in turn by Mr.
Edward Challinor in 1819, and later by Mr. Pointon. In 1856 they passed
to Messrs. Morgan, Williams, & Co., and afterwards to Morgan, Wood, &
Co., from whom, in 1861, they passed into the hands of Messrs. Allman,
Broughton, & Co., and next to Messrs. Robinson, Kirkham, & Co.

In 1869 the old works were entirely taken down and a new and extensive
manufactory erected with all the latest improvements of machinery
and appliances; the jiggers all being driven by steam power, and the
drying stoves heated by exhaust steam. The rebuilding is commemorated
in ornamental scroll stonework over the entrance: “Edward Challinor
commenced business here A.D. 1819, and rebuilt the premises
A.D. 1869.” The new manufactory was opened in 1870 by Mr.
Ralph Hammersley, who removed here from the Church Bank Pottery at
Tunstall, and who had previously been engaged for twenty years or more
with Mr. Challinor.

The goods produced are the ordinary description of earthenware in
services of various kinds and in the usual classes of useful articles,
which, besides a good home trade, are shipped in large quantities to
the United States, Canada, and Sweden. Stoneware jugs are also produced.

  [Illustration: Fig. 407.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Swan Bank Pottery._--These works have passed successively through
the hands of Thomas Edwards; Messrs. Pinder, Bourne, & Co.; Messrs.
Beech and Hancock (now of Tunstall); and Messrs. Hancock, Whittingham,
and Hancock (now of Stoke). In 1873 they came into the hands of the
present proprietors, Messrs. Tundley, Rhodes, and Procter. The goods
produced are, and have been, printed, enamelled, and gilt earthenware,
of the useful classes in all the usual services, &c., for the home,
Russian, and South American markets.

  [Illustration: Figs. 408 and 409.]

_The Hill Top Pottery, or Hill Pottery._--These works, formerly
belonging to Ralph Wood were for many years carried on by Messrs.
Samuel Alcock & Co., by whom they were in 1839 rebuilt and enlarged;
their rearranged manufactory comprising the works of Mr. Riley
(formerly John Taylors), John Robinson and Sons, and William Taylors,
which were all taken down for the purpose. The productions of Messrs.
Samuel Alcock & Co. were, both in china and the finer descriptions of
earthenware, of the highest quality, both in body and in decoration.
One of their specialities was their semi-porcelain, which was of fine
and durable quality. The marks,

                            ALCOCK AND CO.,
                             HILL POTTERY,
                               BURSLEM,

or S. ALCOCK & CO., either printed along with the name of the pattern
or some device, or impressed in the ware. In 1860 the works and general
estate were purchased by Sir James Duke and Nephews, and continued by
them till 1865, when they sold the estate to Mr. Thomas Ford, who,
in the ensuing year, 1866, sold it to the Earthenware and Porcelain
Company, by whom (under the management of Mr. R. Daniel, once a noted
china manufacturer at Stoke, Hanley, and Burslem) it was carried on
under the style of the “Hill Pottery Company, Limited, late S. Alcock &
Co.”

  [Illustration: Figs. 410 to 414.]

The productions of Sir James Duke and Nephews (Messrs. J. and C. Hill)
were of a high order of excellence, in ordinary earthenware services,
ranging from plain white and cream-coloured to the most superb styles
of decoration; in china, which was of remarkably good quality; and
in Etruscan wares. In the latter, some of the best forms of ancient
Etruscan vases were cleverly reproduced, and the decoration, both in
spirit and in style, artistically rendered. Some of the productions of
this firm, who received well-merited distinctions at the Exhibition of
1862, are shown by Figs. 408 to 428.

  [Illustration: Figs. 415 to 417.]

The operations of the “Hill Pottery Company” were of short duration,
for in the next year, 1867, it was put in liquidation and sold up, when
the property again came into the hands of Mr. Ford. In the same year
the works were divided, the china department being taken by Messrs.
Alcock and Diggory, and the earthenware part by “Messrs. Burgess &
Leigh (late S. Alcock & Co.),” by whom it is still carried on under the
style of “Burgess, Leigh, & Co.”

  [Illustration: Figs. 418 to 423.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 424 to 428.]

Messrs. Burgess, Leigh, & Co. manufacture largely the commoner
and ordinary, as well as the higher and more artistic classes of
earthenware goods, both for the home and foreign markets, and their
productions rank high in point of excellence of body, manipulative
skill, and good taste displayed in decoration. The firm produce all
the usual services, and useful as well as many highly ornamental
articles. The mark used by the firm is a beehive on a stand, with bees,
with a rose-bush on either side, and a ribbon bearing the name of the
pattern (“Kensington,” for instance,) beneath, and under this the
initials of the firm, “B. L. & CO.” Many of these patterns are
registered.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Hill Pottery China Works_, on the division of the manufactory
as already stated, in 1867, were carried on by Messrs. Alcock, Diggory,
& Co. In 1870, the firm was altered into that of Bodley and Diggory,
but in the following year, Mr. Diggory having retired, the manufactory
was continued by Mr. Edward F. Bodley. In 1874, the style was again
changed to Bodley and Son, and in 1875 to that by which it is at
present carried on, viz., Edwin J. D. Bodley. The productions formerly
embraced china, earthenware, and Parian, but are now entirely confined
to china. A speciality of Mr. Bodley’s productions is that of pans
and vases for chandeliers and lamps. These are made of various forms,
and more or less highly decorated; they form an important branch of
manufacture. Services of all the usual kinds, more or less elaborately
decorated, are also made. The markets supplied are the home and the
South Australian, New Zealand, and Colonial.

The mark used by Messrs. S. Alcock and Co. at these works was a
beehive; and that of Sir James Duke and Nephews the dexter hand
denoting a baronet.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Crown Works._--Established about 1867 by Messrs. Lea, Smith, and
Boulton, these works were next occupied by Mr. W. E. Withinshawe (see
“Churchyard Works,” page 244, vol. ii.), and then by the present
proprietors, Messrs. Gaskell, Son, and Co. The productions have always
been china door furniture and similar goods (and these are now made
of remarkably good quality, and in many cases of artistic design, by
the present firm), finger-plates, knobs, scutcheons for doors, roses,
caster bowls, and other fittings; scale plates and weights; stands
and bases for lamps; an infinite variety of articles for fittings of
many kinds--white, coloured, black, enamelled, gilt, &c., &c.; while
the imitations of marbles, malachites, and other stones are remarkably
clever and good. Another speciality of these works is umbrella,
parasol, and walking-stick knobs, many of which, whether in imitation
ivory or in dead black, evince great taste in design and skill in
execution. Messrs. Gaskell and Son have taken out patents for the
manufacture of caster bowls on an improved method, and another for
improvement in turning.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Scotia Works._--This manufactory was originally the parish workhouse
of Burslem, and was calculated to accommodate three hundred inmates. On
the establishment of unions, under the Poor-Law Act, when the new union
workhouse was erected, this building was occupied as barracks, and so
continued for some years. It was then converted into a manufactory by
Mr. James Vernon in 1857, and he, in 1862, was succeeded by the present
firm of “Edward F. Bodley & Co.” At these works the usual descriptions
of earthenware, printed, enamelled, and gilt, and “ironstone china,”
for steamship and hotel use, are made. The bodies and glazes, which
have been considerably improved by the manager, Mr. Edward Beardmore,
of Rode Heath, are, through his attention and skill, of a very high
quality. The mark is the Staffordshire knot, with the words SCOTIA
WORKS.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Queen Street Works._--Messrs. Tinsley and Bourne entered on these
works in 1874. They were formerly occupied by Mr. J. Edge and others.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Hill Works_, on the opposite side of the road to the “Hill
Pottery” already described, are of old foundation, and were, I am
informed, worked by Enoch Wood (see page 273); Mr. Wood here growing,
it is said, considerable quantities of “Siberian crabs,” which trees
he planted in successive terraces. The works were also, I believe, at
one time carried on by Ralph Wood, a member of the same family. He
was a master potter in Burslem in 1787, and a very interesting relic
connected with him is now in the hands of Mr. Thos. F. Wood, of this
present firm of Wood & Baggaley. It is an iron tobacco box, bearing,
engraved on its lid, the words, “_Ralph Wood, Potter, Burslem,
Staffordshire_, 1787.” This box was given by this Ralph Wood, whose
name appears upon it, to the grandfather of its present owner. About
1768, John Robinson, who before that time was with Sadler and Green, of
Liverpool, left their employ to commence here the making of enamelled
ware. In the Mayer Museum is a teapot made by him, and painted by
Letitia Marsh (afterwards Mrs. Brood), who worked for him. It is of
“squeezed ware,” and was given to Mr. Mayer by Dr. Simeon Shaw. After
Wood’s time the works were carried on by Mr. Taylor, and next by
Messrs. John & Richard Riley (who removed to them from the Nile Street
works), by whom they were rebuilt, in 1814, and who produced china and
earthenware and Egyptian black ware. They next passed to Messrs. Alcock
& Keeling; and, on the retirement of the latter, to Messrs. Samuel
Alcock & Co., who, having rebuilt and enlarged the “Hill Pottery,”
removed there as already detailed. About 1851, Messrs. Barker & Son
took the “Hill Works” for goods for the home and foreign markets. On
their failure they were, in 1860, succeeded by Messrs. Morgan, Wood,
& Co., which firm was afterwards altered to Messrs. Wood & Baggaley,
the present occupiers. The goods made by Messrs. Wood & Baggaley
are generally confined to the home market; they produce printed and
decorated goods in dinner, toilet, tea, and breakfast services, and
green glazed dessert ware, which, to some extent, they export. The mark
used by the firm is a bee, with wings expanded; beneath which is a
ribbon, with the initials, M W & CO, or W & B.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Sylvester Pottery_, Nile Street, belonging to Charles G. Barker,
produces the ordinary white granite ware for the United States,
Canadian, and other foreign markets.

       *       *       *       *       *

_High Street Pottery._--This manufactory, usually known as “Union
Bank,” through its having been for some time worked by the Potters’
Trades’ Union, belonged at one time to a family named Marsh; and was
also carried on by Messrs. Whittingham, Ford, & Co., from whom it
passed into the hands of the present proprietors, Messrs. Buckley,
Wood, & Co. The goods produced are ordinary earthenware for the common
home trade, and the mark used is simply the initials B W & CO.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Sneyd Pottery_, Albert Street.--These works were formerly carried
on for the production of ordinary earthenware, by Messrs. Bennett.
About 1867 they came into the hands of Williams, Oakes, & Co., and in
1876 the firm was altered to Oakes, Clare, & Chadwick, who produce in
Rockingham, jet, majolica, and common earthenware, the ordinary classes
of articles. They also make chest of drawers feet in large numbers, of
various designs.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Hadderidge Pottery._--These works, carried on by Mr. Thomas Heath,
and afterwards, successively, by Mr. John Wedgwood, Mr. Phillips, and
Messrs. W. & G. Harding, came into the hands of the firm of Heath &
Blackhurst in November, 1859, by whom they are still continued. The
productions are a middle-class quality of earthenware, both plain and
decorated, for the home trade. In this class all the usual table,
toilet, tea, and other services, and a variety of other articles, are
made. The mark is a garter, encircling the initials H & B.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Navigation Road._--The works of Mr. Edward Corn, erected some time
back on what was a timber yard, and now carried on by Messrs. W. & E.
Corn, are exclusively devoted to the production of white graniteware
for the United States and other foreign markets.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Bleak Hill Works._--Messrs. Beech & Podmore, of the _Bell Works_
(which see), entered upon this manufactory in 1876. The works formerly
belonged to Messrs. Moore Brothers, who produced the white graniteware
for the American Markets, then successively to M. Isaacs and Son,
Beech and Podmore, and Podmore alone. The goods now produced, besides
tea and other services, are the ordinary marketable china and Parian
chimney ornaments and toys, which are produced in large quantities
both for home sale and for exportation to the United States, the East
Indies, the Netherlands, and Australia. In Parian and “ivory body,”
besides flower-vases and other small ornaments, some tolerably large
groups have been produced; the “ivory body” possesses great softness
in appearance, and is capable of being made largely available for
ornamental purposes.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Sytch Pottery._--Of very old foundation, this was, many years ago
worked by Messrs. Keeling. The “Sytch Pottery” passed successively
into the hands of Mr. R. Hall and Messrs. J. Hall & Sons. About 1832,
Messrs. Barker, Sutton, & Till took to the works; but at subsequent
periods, Mr. Barker and Mr. Sutton withdrew from the partnership;
and from 1850 it remained in the hands of Mr. Thomas Till, who has
been joined in partnership with his sons, and the firm is now “Thomas
Till & Sons.” The wares usually produced have been good middle-class
earthenware; but the present proprietors have greatly improved
the ware, and added other branches to their manufacture. Besides
earthenware of the usual average quality--in which services and
innumerable useful articles are made by them--Messrs. Till produce
coloured bodies of various kinds (cane, sage, drab, and lilac);
stoneware of a hard and durable kind for jugs, &c.; jet glazed ware;
terra cotta; enamelled ware; and various coloured lustres. These are
principally intended for the home trade. At the Paris Exhibition of
1855 the firm received a certificate of merit. The mark used is the
name of the firm.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Kiln Croft Works._--These works are of old establishment. In or about
1800 they were carried on by a Mr. Handley, and in 1825, by Messrs.
James and Thomas Edwards, who were succeeded by Messrs. Willett &
Marsh. They were then continued by Mr. Marsh alone, and next by Messrs.
T. & R. Boote, who were succeeded by the present owner, Mr. Henry
Burgess. The goods produced are the usual quality of white graniteware,
in services and various articles, for the United States and Canadian
markets. The mark is the Royal Arms, with the name or initials of the
firm.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Albert Pottery_ was built in 1860, by Mr. William Smith, of
Tunstall; on whose failure in 1862 it was taken by Messrs. Dix &
Tundley, of Silverdale, for the production of foreign-trade goods. In
1864 the works were purchased by the late Mr. Charles Hobson (who had
originally been apprenticed to Mr. Williamson, the predecessor of the
Davenports, at Longport), and successfully carried on by him until his
death, in 1875. Mr. Hobson was then succeeded by his two sons, George
and John Hobson, by whom they are continued. By Mr. Hobson the works
were considerably enlarged. New biscuit ovens were added, and flint and
colour mills, steam slip-house, pug mills, and sagger makers’ mill,
built. The productions of the firm are now confined to the home trade,
and consist of the usual services and other articles, in ordinary
earthenware, both white, printed, lined, enamelled, and gilt.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Waterloo Works._--These works were established about 1846 by Mr. James
Vernon; then continued under the style of James Vernon & Son; and are
now carried on by the son, Mr. James Vernon, jun., for the manufacture
of ordinary earthenware for the South American and Italian markets. On
this same site a manufactory was at one time carried on by Mr. Jonathan
Leak, a clever potter, who after some strange vicissitudes went to
Sydney, where, after a time, discovering a valuable bed of clay, he
established the first pottery in Australia. He married a niece of Enoch
Wood.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Central Pottery._--These old-established works, the property of Mr.
Alcock, of Bradwell Lodge, and carried on by his son, Mr. Richard
Alcock, were formerly worked by Messrs. Hopkin & Vernon, next by
Messrs. Hulme & Booth, next by Thomas Hulme, and then by Messrs.
Burgess & Leigh, who were succeeded by Mr. Richard Alcock, by whom they
have been considerably enlarged, rebuilt, and remodelled. Earthenware
for the home markets was formerly made, but the operations are now
confined to white graniteware for the United States.

Other manufacturers in Burslem have been, Joseph Machin & Co.; Thomas
Heath (probably of the same family as the Heaths formerly of the
Cock-pit Hill Pottery, Derby); John Hall & Sons; J. R. Marsh; T. & B.
Godwin; J. Cormie; Messrs. Phillips, Dale Hall.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Longport._--(Davenport & Co.) The famous works of Messrs. Davenport
& Son date back more than a hundred years, the centenary of their
establishment having taken place in 1873. In 1773 a manufactory was
erected at Longport by John Brindley (brother of the celebrated James
Brindley, the engineer, both of whom were natives of Tunstead, in
Derbyshire), who also built for himself a handsome residence near at
hand. This house was purchased in 1843 for a parsonage for St. Paul’s,
Burslem, and was again, in 1858, sold to Mr. W. Davenport. Shortly
after 1773 Mr. Edward Bourne built another manufactory, and this was
followed by a third, erected by Mr. Robert Williamson, who in 1775
married Anne (_née_ Henshall), widow of James Brindley, the engineer.

In 1793 the first-named manufactories passed into the hands of Mr.
John Davenport, who greatly extended their operations. In 1797 Mr.
John Davenport added to his other operations “the chemical preparation
of litharge and white lead for the use of potters,” which, however,
was afterwards discontinued. In 1801 the business of glass-making was
added and is still carried on. In 1803 Mr. Davenport, supported by his
neighbours at Longport, offered to raise, clothe, and equip, free of
expense to Government, except arms, a volunteer corps of 500 men, and
his offer was accepted, the number being limited by Government to four
companies of 80 rank and file each. Mr. Davenport became Major of this
force, and raised it to a high state of discipline. In connection with
this it may be well to note that one of Mr. Davenport’s workmen at
that time, and a member of his volunteer corps, was William Clowes, a
nephew of Aaron Wedgwood, to whom he had been apprenticed. This William
Clowes was a co-founder with Hugh Bourne of the now wide-spread sect
of Primitive Methodists. About 1830 Mr. Davenport retired from active
business, and chiefly resided at Westwood Hall, near Leek, where he
died in 1848. The business was then carried on by the second son, Mr.
Henry Davenport (who died in 1835), and the youngest son, Mr. William
Davenport. Mr. Henry Davenport purchased the manufactory of Mr. Robert
Williamson, and also his residence; these he enlarged and improved
and added to his other works. In 1832 Mr. John Davenport was elected
M.P. for the borough of Stoke-upon-Trent, being one of the first two
members for that newly enfranchised borough. After the death of Mr.
Henry Davenport the manufactories were carried on by his youngest
brother, Mr. William Davenport, under the style of “W. Davenport & Co.”
This gentleman died in 1869, and the entire business is now carried
on by his only son, Mr. Henry Davenport, who fully sustains the high
character of the works and of their varied productions.

King George IV., while Prince of Wales, in 1806 visited Messrs.
Davenport’s works in company with his brother, King William IV., at
that time Duke of Clarence. On the accession of William IV. to the
throne his Majesty gave the order to this firm to manufacture for him
a superb service, to be used at his coronation banquet. This Royal
Service was completed in a very satisfactory manner, and was the
subject of high commendation from the king and his noble guests on that
occasion. On this service the crown was first used by the firm.

In the earlier years of the Longport manufactory, earthenware alone
was produced, but no pieces of Brindley’s make are known. Mr.
Davenport at first confined his operations to the manufacture of
white, cream-coloured, and blue-printed wares, and these were of good
substantial quality; his blue-printed plates with open-work rim of the
same general character as those of the Herculaneum Works at Liverpool,
are to be seen in most collections. Later on china was commenced, and
at the present time this forms an equally extensive branch of the
business with the earthenware. In both these, all the usual services
and miscellaneous articles are produced, from the plain to the most
elaborately decorated, both for the home, the continental, and the
Brazilian markets; warehouses having been many years ago established by
Mr. Davenport, M.P., at Hamburg and at Lubeck.

The china produced by Messrs. Davenport at the present time is of
remarkably fine and good quality, both in body, in glaze, and in make,
and in all these particulars ranks among the best produced in the
district. Their tea and dessert ware is of extreme excellence, and many
of the patterns are unsurpassed for richness of colouring and gilding
by any other house. Among these specialities, their adaptations of
the fine old Indian patterns, and such designs as gave so important a
character to the productions of the old Derby works in their palmiest
days, are especially good. The deep blues, the rich gradations of red,
and the other colours employed, are in some of the patterns laid on
with a lavish richness, and being combined with the most elaborate and
delicate as well as massive gilding, produce intricate patterns of
great beauty and of sumptuous appearance when “set out.” Some of the
cups (notably those with sunk panels, and others which are bowl-shaped
and supported upon gilt feet) are of elegant form, and are as faultless
in manipulation as they are in decoration. In blue and white, whether
in pencilled, ordinary transfer printing, or “flown” patterns, Messrs.
Davenport are highly successful; and the blues they introduce have all
the delicacy and purity of the best Oriental. The same remark as to
purity and cleanness of tone will apply to their ground colours--the
celadon and the rose du Barry--in both of which they produce charming
but simple services, as they do also in white; in the latter the
“potting” of some--approaching closely to egg-shell--is remarkably
delicate and clever.

Another striking speciality of design in Messrs. Davenport’s china is
the clever and artistic way in which they have adapted the old Willow
pattern to the modern requirements of déjeuner services and menu
holders. The forms of the various pieces composing the service are of
quaint and striking elegance, and, being heightened by massively gilt
handles, and by strictly appropriate gilding of borders, rims, feet and
raised ornaments, an effect is produced which is surpassingly “taking.”
The déjeuner of which I have thus briefly spoken is one of the most
successful adaptations of the Willow pattern yet achieved.

In “stone china,” Messrs. Davenport’s dinner and dessert services,
as well as jugs and other articles, are of faultless quality, and
the styles of decoration, especially those which are adaptations--not
servile imitations--of old Indian patterns, are remarkably good and
effective. In some of these the spirit of the foreign artist has been
so thoroughly caught, that, to the casual observer, they might well
pass for genuine foreign pieces. The services in ordinary earthenware
are extremely varied in pattern, in amount of decoration, and in
variety of shapes; they are of good quality.

  [Illustration: Figs. 429 to 431.]

The marks used by Messrs. Davenport have been various, but almost in
every instance the anchor has been the distinguishing characteristic;
it is the trade mark of the firm. The crown was first used by them,
on the Royal Service for William IV., and is now generally used on
porcelain services. Figs. 429 to 436 are impressed marks.

  [Illustration: Figs. 432 to 436.]

The printed marks are, a circular garter, bearing the words DAVENPORT
LONGPORT STAFFORDSHIRE, surrounding an anchor and the words “Stone
China” in script. Another is a shield, with the words 30 CANNING PLACE
LIVERPOOL 82 FLEET STREET LONDON encircled by a garter bearing the
words DAVENPORT LONGPORT STAFFORD^{RE} and surmounted by the crest, an
anchor on an heraldic wreath. Another has a circular garter, bearing
the words DAVENPORTS & CO. surrounding the address, 82, FLEET STREET
LONDON.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Longport Terra Cotta._--At the 1851 Exhibition Mr. W. Marsh, (modeller
at Davenports’) of Longport, exhibited a very successful example of
terra cotta produced by him. It was a wine-cooler of bold and good
design. It is engraved on Fig. 414. In the early part of this century
Messrs. Samuel Marsh & Co. were manufacturers at Brownhills.

  [Illustration: Fig. 437.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Brownhills._--About 1782 Mr. John Wood (son of Ralph Wood, of
Brownhills, and Mary Wedgwood) built a manufactory, with house
adjoining, on property originally belonging to the Burslem and Wedgwood
families, which he had purchased of Thomas Lovatt. Here he carried on
the potting business until his death in 1797, when he was succeeded by
his son, Mr. John Wood, who continued it until 1830, when he took down
the manufactory, enlarged the house, and extended the grounds.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Littler._--William Littler, of Brownhills, whose father had carried
on a business as potter there, was the first man in Staffordshire who
attempted the making of china ware. “He commenced business about 1745
when he attained his majority, and a few years afterwards removed
the seat of his manufacture to Longton Hall, where he prosecuted
his experiments with very good success, as regarded the beauty and
delicacy of his china, but with disastrous results to himself, for he
soon sacrificed his patrimony in the speculation, and was obliged to
abandon it. The specimens we have seen of Mr. Littler’s china exhibit
great lightness and beauty, and would certainly have won their way
in after times. Mr. Littler had the merit of first making use of the
fluid glaze which Mr. Enoch Booth afterwards improved upon.”--(_Ward._)
Littler’s pot-works have long disappeared. Some specimens of Littler’s
porcelain are preserved in private collections, and one or two are in
the Hanley Museum; to one of these is attached the following note in
Enoch Wood’s handwriting: “This was given to Enoch Wood by William
Fletcher, in January, 1809.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_Marsh and Haywood._--This firm formerly carried on business here as
manufacturers of general earthenware, as did also Mr. John Wood, at
Highgate.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Brownhills Works._--These works (formerly Marsh and Haywoods) were
for many years carried on by Mr. George F. Bowers, who attained a
fair reputation for china goods, and gained a medal at the Exhibition
of 1851. Subsequently he commenced the manufacture of earthenware,
which he continued until his death, when he was succeeded by his son,
Mr. Frederick F. Bowers. On his failure in 1871 the manufactory was
purchased by Mr. James Eardley, of Alsager, and it is now carried on
by his son and sons-in-law, Messrs. Alfred J. Eardley, Edwin Meir,
William H. Bratt, Robert H. Parker, and George Hammersley, under the
style of “The Brownhills Pottery Co.;” considerable alterations and
extensions have been made in the buildings. The goods produced by the
Company are of the usual useful classes of table, tea, toilet, and
other requisites, in fine earthenware, stoneware, buff, turquoise,
and cream-coloured ware; and in decorations of the fine earthenware
services improvements have been effected by which the printing of
enamel upon the glaze, and lining on the bisque, are effected. The last
is produced at considerable less cost than enamel lines, and while
making a tolerably near approach in point of colour, is more durable,
because protected by the glaze. The body and glaze are of good quality,
and the decorations, whether printed or painted, are of good average
character. In dinner services some of their more recent patterns,
are the “Premier,” “Pagoda,” and “Dragon,” which are produced both
printed and enamelled; their most successful shapes are the “Bulrush,”
“Laurel,” and “Boston.” In toilet ware their “Greek” shape, is
remarkably good, and is made in various degrees of decoration. In stone
ware, some excellent designs in tea-pots, jugs, &c., are produced, as
are also jugs and other useful articles in cream ware; the adaptations
of Japanese ornamentation in the former are highly successful. In jet
ware, which is of good quality, tea-pots, jugs, and other articles
are made, and some of those are highly decorated in enamel and gold;
the firm also have a process of printing in yellow upon the glaze of
their jet goods, which produces a cheap and somewhat effective class
of decoration. Another speciality is a rich full deep-red terra cotta,
highly glazed, and elaborately decorated in a variety of effective
patterns in enamel and gold; in this, toilet services of good design
and novel appearance are largely made. In ornamental goods the Company
produce vases of various forms (notably among which are the “Hindoo,”
“Milan,” “Pekin,” and other designs); scent jars, flower tubes, and
stands, and other articles. The productions are of a good useful
quality, decorated in a more than ordinarily artistic style; many of
the designs (notably the “Briony” pattern toilet services, “Lorne”
tea-pots, &c.) are good, and the colours faultless. The marks used,
besides the name of the pattern, “Minerva,” “Link,” “Laurel,” &c., bear
the initials B. P. CO., with ribbon, &c., printed on the ware.

       *       *       *       *       *

_New Bridge Works, Longport._--This manufactory, spoken of on page
283 as one of those carried on by Messrs. W. Davenport and Son, in 1877
passed into the hands of Mr. Edward Clarke, formerly of the Church
Yard Works at Burslem, and of the Phœnix Works at Tunstall (both of
which see), who removed thither from the last-named place. In that year
Mr. Clarke took into partnership Mr. F. J. Emery, the inventor of the
process of crayon drawing and painting on the bisque surface, referred
to on page 295. Mr. Clarke, whose productions both at Burslem and at
Tunstall are spoken of in other parts of this volume, produces the
finest, hardest, and most durable earthenware in “white granite” for
the American markets, where it takes and maintains the highest rank. He
also produces all the usual services in various styles of decoration,
for the home trade. The mark used by the new firm is the name “EDWARD
CLARKE & CO.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_Waterloo Road Works_, established in 1820 (on the site of a very
old pottery “on Bournes Bank,” afterwards worked by William Harrison)
by Mr. Thomas Hughes (grandfather, of the present owner), and carried
on by him and his successors, Stephen Hughes & Co., till about 1856,
since which time they have been continued solely by the present Mr.
Thomas Hughes, by whom the whole place has been enlarged, improved, and
modernised. The manufactory is now considered to be one of the best
arranged in the town. The goods produced are all the usual articles
in the hard durable “granite” or so-called “ironstone china” for the
American markets; they are of good quality, and are produced both light
and heavy to meet various requirements. Goods are also, to some extent,
produced for the home trade. The mark, stamped on the ware, is

                             THOMAS HUGHES
                            IRONSTONE CHINA

       *       *       *       *       *

_Cobridge Works._--The manufactory of Messrs. W. Brownfield & Son was
erected in 1808, and from that time for a few years was worked by
Messrs. Bucknall & Stevenson, and afterwards by Mr. A. Stevenson alone.
In 1819 the works were closed, and afterwards passed into the hands of
Mr. James Clews, who continued them until 1829, when they were again
closed. His mark was a crown and his name, thus--

  [Illustration: Fig. 438.

    CLEWS
    Warranted Staffordshire]

  [Illustration: Fig. 439.]

In 1836 the premises were opened by Messrs. Robinson, Wood, &
Brownfield, and after Mr. Robinson’s death, in the same year, were
continued by Wood & Brownfield. In 1850 Mr. Wood retired, and the
business was continued solely by Mr. Brownfield (who died in 1873)
until 1871, when he was joined in partnership by his eldest son, Mr.
William Etches Brownfield, and from that time to the present the
firm has been carried on under the style of “W. Brownfield & Son.”
The goods produced during the earlier period of the works were the
ordinary white, blue printed, and sponged varieties of earthenware.
From 1850, when the works became the sole property of Mr. Brownfield,
rapid strides were made in the improvement of the wares, and under
the present firm they have become equal to any others produced. In
earthenware, which, both in body and glaze, is of more than average
quality, Messrs. Brownfield & Son produce white, printed, enamelled,
and gilt wares, from the simplest to the more elaborate and costly
patterns, in table, toilet, and dessert services, and all the usual
articles for household use. Many of the printed patterns are well
designed, and in the better classes of goods the enamelling and gilding
are very effective. Some of the most successful are imitations of
the grand old patterns adopted by Mason on his ironstone china. The
stoneware jugs produced are a speciality of this firm, and take a
foremost rank; in quality of body they are remarkably good; while in
form, in modelling, and in decoration they are of equal excellence.
The group Fig. 439 represents some examples from the Exhibition of
1862, where the firm, as well as at Paris in 1867, received a medal.
Tea services, tea-kettles, tea-pots, flower-pots, vases, jardinière,
trinket services, and other goods, are also produced in earthenware
in every style of decoration. Notably among these is a remarkably
well-designed and elegant strawberry tray, formed of shells and
strawberry leaves, with a seated Cupid in the centre at the back; it
is particularly artistic, both in composition, in execution, and in
colouring.

In 1871 the manufacture of china was added to that of earthenware (new
buildings being specially erected for the purpose), and the productions
in this department have made rapid strides towards perfection. In
china, dinner, tea, breakfast, dessert, and other services, jugs, and
a variety of useful articles, as well as vases and other fancy goods,
are produced. Messrs. B. & S. have, in this branch, produced some novel
and very effective designs in dessert services, centre-pieces, fern and
flower-stands, &c., and some of their vases are of the highest style
of excellence. Notably among these is a pair of magnificent vases,
exquisitely painted, with Etty-like subjects of “Morning and Mid-day.”
These are among the highest achievements of modern Art. Among the minor
pieces is an oviform vase representing the hatching of the egg. The
body of the vase is true to nature in colour--that of a sea-bird’s egg;
the handles are formed of the heads, and the bird’s legs and feet form
the stand.

  [Illustration: Fig. 440.]

The mark of the firm upon the printed goods was formerly W & B, W B, or
W B & S, in addition to the name of the pattern. The present mark on
both earthenware and porcelain is--

  [Illustration: Fig. 441.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 442.]

The impressed marks are the Staffordshire knot (Fig. 442), enclosing
the initials W B; and the name BROWNFIELD.

The firm does a large home trade, as well as an export one to Denmark,
France, Germany, Holland, Russia, Italy, Spain, Portugal, United States
and other parts of America, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, India, and
other countries. The manufactory is very extensive; upwards of five
hundred persons being employed.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Illustration: Figs. 443 to 446.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 447 to 453.]

_T. Furnival & Sons._--This firm (who occupy two old manufactories,
viz., those formerly belonging to Adams and to Blackwell) has been
established about thirty years, and ranks high as manufacturers of
white granite and vitrified ironstone, and decorated toilet wares,
for the United States and Canadian markets, to which they ship large
quantities of goods, as they do also printed goods to the continental
markets. For the home trade Messrs. Furnival & Sons produce, in
their beautiful “patent ironstone,” dinner and other services of
various qualities in point of decoration. Among their more recent
“specialities” are dinner services, &c, of rich Italian design (made
for Pellatt & Wood), plain white, with a china-like surface and glaze;
the ornamentation, which is indented, is produced from an embossed
mould, the lines being as fine and delicate as if cut in by the graver,
so as to have the appearance of chasing; and the lines being filled
with glaze the surface is still even. Other noted patterns are the
“Dresden Flute” and “Lemon Knob” services. In crested services for the
home markets a large and satisfactory trade is done. Another noticeable
feature is the happy combination in services of transfer printing,
hand painting, enamelling and gilding; some of the services, those
decorated with grasses and insects especially, are of high artistic
order, and show how advantageously the two processes can be combined.
Our engraving shows a group of articles produced at that manufactory,
which are remarkable for their elegant forms and for the simple beauty
of their decorations. Another engraving exhibits a remarkably elegant
flower-pot and stand, with relief figures and other decorations. But
these are not a tithe of the beautiful articles produced by Messrs.
Furnival. Among the more successful of their productions are the “Swan”
and “Nautilus” toilet services, which are of great beauty. The body of
the former ewer is oviform, with bulrush decorations in relief; the
neck, mouth, and handle make a well-formed swan. These are produced in
white, heightened with gold, and enamelled in colours. The “Nautilus”
pattern has the mouth of the ewer formed of a nautilus shell and the
handle of coral, while the decorations are sea-weeds, true to nature,
both in modelling and in colour. The mark of the firm is simply
FURNIVAL impressed in the ware.

In connection with these works Mr. F. J. Emery, the then cashier to
the firm, introduced, a few years ago, a method of crayon drawing and
painting on the bisqué surface of earthenware and china. This beautiful
process, which is especially applicable to tiles for fire-places, &c.,
but is also admirably adapted for the decoration of ordinary articles,
has become much in repute, and exquisite drawings have been made in it
by some of the first artists of the time, as well as by lady and other
amateurs. The bisqué articles, and prepared crayons and colours, were
supplied by Mr. Emery, who afterwards became a partner with Mr. E.
Clarke at Longport.

  [Illustration: Fig. 454.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Bates & Bennet_ (formerly John & Robert Godwin), are manufacturers
of general earthenware of ordinary quality, the principal productions
being what is called “Imperial measure ware” for the home markets.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Abbey Pottery._--(H. Meakin, late Edward Pearson.)--These works
were, it is said, established in 1703. White granite ware, for the
American markets only, has of late years been produced.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Villa Pottery._--This manufactory for general earthenware was carried
on at the beginning of the present century, by Mr. Warburton. From
about 1835 it was carried on by Messrs. Jones & Walley till 1850, from
which time, until 1865, Mr. Edward Walley continued it. In the latter
year it passed into the hands of Messrs. Wood, Son, & Co., its present
proprietors, who confine themselves to the production of plain white
granite ware for the American and other foreign markets. The mark is
the Royal Arms and name of the firm.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Cobridge Works._--Established in 1836 by Messrs. Wingfield Harding
& Charles Cockson, under the firm of Harding & Cockson, who produced
ordinary china goods. In 1856, on the death of Mr. Harding, the
business was continued, until 1861, by his sons, W. M. and J. B.
Harding, in partnership with Mr. Cockson; and from 1862 to 1865 by
Mr. Charles Cockson alone, during the whole of which time china was
produced. In 1866 Elijah and David Chetwynd became partners, the firm
being then Cockson & Chetwynd. In 1873 Mr. Cockson died, and the
business was continued by his widow under the same style till 1876,
when the former retired, and it again changed to Cockson & Seddon. In
1866 the making of china was discontinued and the manufacture of white
granite ware, for the American trade, substituted. The mark is the
Royal Arms and the name “IMPERIAL IRONSTONE CHINA, COCKSON & CHETWYND,”
or “COCKSON & SEDDON.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_Cobridge Works._--Messrs. Henry Alcock & Co., at these extensive
works, which were formerly carried on by John Alcock, manufacture white
granite ware exclusively for the American markets.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Elder Road Works._--This pottery has been worked by Messrs. Meakin
& Co. since 1865, and is capable of turning out about 2,500 crates
of ware annually. The productions are entirely confined to the white
granite ware for the United States.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Warburton._--Pot works were established here by John Warburton very
early in the last century; after his death they were continued by his
widow, Ann Warburton. They are stated to have made white stoneware
for Holland and the Continent, and to have ultimately brought over
some workmen from Delft. Jacob Warburton, the son, succeeded to the
business, and died in 1826, at the ripe age of eighty-four. His son,
Peter Warburton, was one of the partners of the New Hall China Works
(which see); to him is said by Shaw to belong the credit of printing
in gold, and to his mother that of first using soda. In 1810, Peter
Warburton took out a patent for “a new method of decorating china,
porcelain, earthenware, and glass, with native, pure or adulterated,
gold, silver, platina, or other metals, fluxed or lowered with lead or
any other substance, which invention or new method leaves the metals
after being burned in their metallic state.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_Daniel._--Ralph Daniel, a potter at Cobridge, employed in the early
part of last century some workmen from Delft, and, to keep their
process secret, started works at Bagnall for them. About 1743 he
introduced the use of plaster of Paris moulds, such as he found were
being used in France.

The potters at Cobridge in 1843 were Wood and Brownfield, John and
George Alcock, Francis Dillon, Elijah Jones, Stephen Hughes and Co.,
Benjamin Endon Godwin, John Mayer Godwin and James Godwin, John and
Robert Godwin, George and Ralph Leigh, and Coxon, Harding, and Co.
Potteries also, early in last century, existed at Holden Lane, at
Milton, and at Sneyd Green.

Other potters at one time or other at Cobridge are N. Dillon, R.
Stevenson, Mansfield & Hackney, and Rathbone, Hill & Co.

Other manufacturers are W. E. Cartledge, Bournes Bank; W. Holdcroft;
Hope and Carter; Thos. Hughes; Maddock & Co., formerly Maddock and
Gater; C. Meakin; Oulsnam and Son; Pope and Co.; and Wade and Colclough.

In 1770 (Feb. 4th), the following Staffordshire potters signed an
agreement as to prices:--John Platt, John Lowe, John Taylor, John Cobb,
Robt. Bucknall, John Daniel, Thos. Daniel, junr., Richd. Adams, (Dr.)
Saml. Chatterley, Thos. Lowe, John Allen, Wm. Parrott, Jacob Warburton,
Warburton and Stone, Jos. Smith, Joshua Heath, John Bourn, Jos.
Stephens, Wm. Smith, Jos. Simpson, John Weatherby, J. and Rd. Mare,
Nicholas Poole, John Yates, Chas. Hassells, Ann Warburton and Son (T.
Warburton), Wm. Meir. Other potters were Chas. and Ephraim Chatterley,
W. Mellor, and Whithead.




                             CHAPTER VII.

   Hanley and Shelton--Miles--Phillips--Astbury--Baddeley--Edwards
   --Voyez--Palmer--Neale--Wilson--New Hall Works--Hollins--Keeling
   --Turner--Warburton--Clowes--Bagnall--New Hall Company--Richard
   Champion--Glass--Twyford--Mare--Twemlow--Old Hall
   Works--Meigh--Broad Street Works--Mason--Ashworth--Cauldon
   Place--Ridgways--Browne-Westhead & Co.--Trent
   Pottery--Keeling--Booth & Co.--Stafford Street Works--Church
   Works--Waterloo Works--Kensington Works--Burton Place
   Works--Clarence Street Works--Nelson Place--Phœnix and
   Bell Works----Bedford Works--Mayer Street--Cannon Street
   Works--Brewery Street--Percy Street Works--Taylor, Tunnicliffe
   & Co.--Biller & Co.--Albion Works--Eastwood Vale--Eastwood
   Works--Dental Manufacturing Company--Trent Pottery--James
   Dudson--Victoria Works--Charles Street Works--High
   Street--Eagle Works--Brook Street Works--Cannon Street--William
   Stubbs--Norfolk Street Works--Broad Street--Albert
   Works--Ranelagh Works--Swan Works--Mayer Street Works--Brook
   Street Works--Dresden Works--Bath Street Works--Waterloo
   Works--New Street Pottery--Castle Field Pottery--Henry Venables.


_Miles._--In 1685 Thomas Miles, of Shelton, was a maker of white
stoneware, of much the same kind as that imported from Germany and
Holland. He is stated to have used the Shelton clay, such as had been
used by pipe-makers, worked with other clays from Baddeley Edge.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Phillips._--Occasionally pieces are met with bearing the name of this
potter, who was of Shelton.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Astbury._--Having already, in the first volume, spoken of the manner
in which one of the family of Astbury discovered the use of calcined
flint, and how the secret of the brothers Elers was surreptitiously
obtained, it is not necessary to recapitulate it here. The Astburys
were a very old and important family, as connected with the potteries,
and one of them, Samuel Astbury, was uncle to Josiah Wedgwood (having
married his father’s sister, Elizabeth Wedgwood), and in 1744 was one
of the witnesses to the deed of his apprenticeship. The discoverer of
the use of flint, it appears more than probable, was John Astbury,
whose gravestone is in Stoke churchyard. The inscription on the stone
is, “Here lieth the body of John Astbury, the Elder, of Shelton,
Potter, who departed this life March 3rd, 1743, aged 55 years.” The use
of flint was discovered about 1720, when he was about thirty-two years
old, and the brothers Elers had previously left the district, about
1710. John Astbury had a son Joshua, of the Foley, who died 1780, as
recorded on the same stone. Other sons were Thomas and Samuel. “John
Astbury, the elder,” as recorded on his tombstone, lost a daughter
Margaret, aged six, in 1728, and he had afterwards a second daughter
of the same name, who married Robert Garner, potter, and was the
mother of Robert Garner (father of Robert Garner, Esq., of Stoke), an
eminent potter of Lane End (which see). Twyford, who shares the credit
of having wormed out the secrets of the Elers, was a fellow workman,
and afterwards a partner of Astbury, and was, either himself or by his
descendants, connected with the family.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Baddeley._--Another of the old potteries of this place was carried on
in 1750 by R. & J. Baddeley, who, at a somewhat later date, were famous
for their blue ware. An interesting reference to these works will be
found at page 137, vol. i., in connection with a workman named Doe. In
1794 Ralph Baddeley was in business in Shelton, and in 1796 the firm
was “John & Edward Baddeley, Shelton,” as appears by their billheads
of that date. The premises were afterwards used by Hicks, Meigh, &
Co. (see Broad Street Works). Of another potter of this name, William
Baddeley, a notice will be found on a later page.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Edwards._--Warner Edwards had, last century, works in Albion Street,
where he not only manufactured various kinds of ware, but made enamel
colours for other houses. He died in 1753, and the premises were
afterwards occupied by Messrs. J. & W. Ridgway. Mr. Thomas Daniel, an
eminent potter, was his apprentice. During his last illness Warner
Edwards handed his book of recipes to this Thomas Daniel, who was
father of Spode’s clever enameller, Henry Daniel, who afterwards, in
conjunction with his son Richard, was a successful manufacturer at
Stoke and Hanley. It is worthy of remark that Edwards was a maker of
enamel colours full twenty years before Wedgwood took out his patent
for them in 1769.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Voyez._--This clever workman, a modeller, was employed by Wedgwood
about 1768, and “off and on” afterwards, but was a dishonourable and
erratic character. He produced many clever imitations of Wedgwood and
Bentley’s wares, and is said to have even stamped them with their name,
which he forged, and sold the goods as their work. Occasionally his
name, J. VOYEZ, is found impressed in the body of the ware.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Palmer._--John Palmer, of Bagnall, about 1680, was a salt-glaze
potter, and was the one to whom the discovery of the use of salt was
first told (see vol. i., page 94). His son or grandson, Henry Palmer,
was also a potter at Hanley (at the Church Works, in High Street,
which he probably built), and was a successful imitator of Wedgwood’s
productions. His Egyptian black, or basalt ware, and his jasper
ware, are of great excellence and beauty and very closely resemble
those of Wedgwood. He was noted for his piracy of these goods, and
surreptitiously obtained Wedgwood’s new designs as they came out. His
piracy was, however, after a time, carried too far, and an injunction
was served upon him to restrain his making Etruscan painted vases in
contravention of Wedgwood’s patent. This ended in a compromise: Palmer
purchasing a share in the patent right. Intaglios and seals were also,
about 1772–3, closely copied by Palmer, much to the annoyance and loss
of Wedgwood and Bentley. In 1778 Mr. Palmer failed. Neale, who is said
to have been a partner with Palmer so far as his London business was
concerned, having arranged matters, the business at Hanley was carried
on under the style of “Neale & Palmer” and “Neale & Co.” The mark of
Mr. Palmer was in the same style as that of Wedgwood and Bentley--a
circle with the name in raised letters (Fig. 455). Some examples bear
the name, stamped, “H. Palmer, Hanley, Staffordshire.” Palmer and Neale
are said to have married two sisters, the daughters of Thomas Heath, of
Lane Delph; and Mr. Pratt, of Fenton, a third daughter.

  [Illustration: Fig. 455.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Neale._--Neale, the successor of Palmer, continued the business
at Hanley, and produced many remarkably good and artistic articles
in basalt, in jasper, and in other wares, and became, if possible,
even a more close and clever imitator of Wedgwood’s wares than his
predecessor had been. In 1780 he appears to have had two partners, and
to have carried on the business under the style of “Neale, Maidment,
and Bailey,” and, later, as “Neale & Bailey” and “Neale and Wilson.”
Usually, however, the firm was simply “Neale & Co.” Neale’s productions
are much esteemed for the excellence of the body, the cleverness of
design, and the sharpness of their execution. His cream-coloured
earthenware, too, is of very good and fine quality. He was succeeded,
I believe, by his partner Wilson. The marks used by Neale, so far as I
have met with them, are “Neale & Co.,” sometimes in large and at others
in small sized letters, impressed in the ware; _NEALE & CO._ in italic
capital letters, also impressed; NEALE & CO. in Roman capital letters,
also impressed; and “Neale & Wilson.” Another mark was, like Palmer’s,
adopted, in form, from Wedgwood & Bentley. It is a circle, bearing the
name in raised letters.

  [Illustration: Fig. 456.]

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Illustration: Fig. 457.]

_Wilson._--Robert Wilson, the successor to the firm of Neale & Wilson,
continued the manufactory, but devoted himself mainly to cream-coloured
earthenware, more or less decorated. His name is occasionally met with
simply as WILSON impressed in the body of the ware, and occasionally
in connection with a crown and the distinctive mark C (Fig. 457).
Robert Wilson was for a long time sole manager to Neales; and he,
and the still more celebrated potter, Elijah Mayer, whose works and
residence were just opposite the Church Works, married two sisters of
the name of Mayer, but of different families. After the retirement or
death of Wilson his brother David carried on the works (1802). It was
afterwards D. Wilson & Sons; then Assignees of Wilson; then Phillips
& Bagster. The Phillips of this firm was Jacob, brother to Jonathan
Phillips, of Oxford Street, London, and uncle to the present Messrs.
Phillips of Oxford Street. The firm was then Bagster alone for a while,
after which the manufactory and house adjoining, where Bagster had
resided, came into the market and were purchased by Joseph Mayer, son
and successor of Elijah Mayer, whose works and residence, as I said
before, were immediately opposite the road. The Church Works were
then (1831) rented by William Ridgway & Co., Mr. Ridgway being Joseph
Mayer’s cousin; and I should here mention that Job Ridgway, the father
of William and John Ridgway, had married the sister of Elijah Mayer,
Joseph’s father. Joseph Mayer had in his employ a clever modeller named
Leonard James Abington, who was also a fair chemist, and so much in
favour with his employer that the latter placed him in partnership with
William Ridgway, and he was the ‘Co.’ It was shortly after this (about
1833) that Joseph Mayer ceased potting, and let his works to William
Ridgway & Co. in addition to the Church Works. He, however, retained
some warehouses and stabling offices adjoining his residence, and had
these crammed with some of the best of his stock, Egyptian black, cane,
chocolate, brown, and Queen’s ware, some of the latter elaborately
perforated and painted--an indescribable jumble of most beautiful
pottery,--and there it remained locked up until his death in 1860. To
return to the Church Works: the next addition to the firm, as soon as
he was old enough to enter it, was William Ridgway’s son, Edward John,
the title of the firm being changed to William Ridgway, Son & Co. In
course of time William Ridgway retiring, the two manufactories were
carried on by his son, Edward John Ridgway, and L. J. Abington, and it
was styled Ridgway & Abington. It was ultimately Edward John Ridgway
alone, and is now Powell & Bishop, Mr. E. J. Ridgway having built large
works in Bedford Road called the Bedford Works.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _New Hall Works_ are historically interesting as being the first in
which porcelain was successfully made in Staffordshire, and to them,
therefore, must be ascribed the introduction of that art into “the
Potteries,” since become so famous and so extensive. In my account
of the Bristol china works[51] I have shown how Richard Champion’s
patent (who had purchased the patent right of William Cookworthy,
of Plymouth,) was sold to a company of Staffordshire potters. This
transfer of rights took place in or about the year 1777. The company
consisted of six persons, viz., Samuel Hollins, of Shelton, Anthony
Keeling, of Tunstall, John Turner, of Lane End, Jacob Warburton, of Hot
Lane, William Clowes, of Port Hill, and Charles Bagnall, of Shelton. Of
these six persons the following are brief notices:--

   _Samuel Hollins_, a maker of the fine red-ware tea-pots,
   &c., from the clay at Bradwell, previously worked by the
   brothers Elers, was of Shelton, and was the son of Mr. Hollins,
   of the Upper Green, Hanley. He was an excellent practical
   potter, and made many improvements in his art. He was afterwards
   one of the partners of the New Hall China Works, and his
   successors in the manufactory were his sons, Messrs. T. & J.
   Hollins.

          *       *       *       *       *

   _Anthony Keeling_, of Tunstall, was son-in-law of the
   celebrated potter, Enoch Booth, having married his daughter
   Ann. Keeling succeeded Enoch Booth in his business, which he
   carried on successfully for many years. He erected a large house
   near the works, but in 1810, retired on a small independence
   to Liverpool, where he died a few years afterwards. He was
   the principal support of a small sect calling themselves
   “Sandemanians,” who had their place of worship in his works.

          *       *       *       *       *

   _John Turner_, first of Stoke, and then of Lane End, father
   of Messrs. John and William Turner, was one of the most clever
   and successful potters Staffordshire ever produced, but one
   about whom little has been written. Many of his productions in
   black and in jasper, &c., are quite equal to those of Wedgwood,
   and, indeed, are often mistaken for the work of that great
   man. Mr. Turner’s cream ware, too, as well as his stone ware,
   of which his jugs are best known to collectors, rank high in
   excellence both of design and manipulation. In 1762 Mr. Turner
   commenced manufacturing at Lane End, and made many improvements
   in the art, and by the discovery of a vein of fine clay at Green
   Dock was enabled successfully to compete not only with other
   potters, but with Wedgwood himself. Mr. Turner is stated to have
   been deputed, with Wedgwood, by the Staffordshire potters, to
   oppose the extension of the patent to Champion.

          *       *       *       *       *

   _Jacob Warburton_, of Hot, or Holt Lane, a man highly respected
   by every class, and who lived until the year 1826, was born
   in 1740, and passed his long and useful life as a potter, in
   which art he rose to considerable eminence in his early years
   in connection with his father and brothers, and later on his
   own account, and, in partnership with others, in the New Hall
   Works. He was the “last member of the old school of potters, the
   early friend and contemporary of the ‘father of the Potteries,’
   Josiah Wedgwood, with whom he was for many years in the habit
   of confidential intercourse and friendship. Numerous are the
   benefits which the public derived from the united exertions of
   the talents and abilities of these two venerated characters, on
   every point connected with the local interest and prosperity
   of the Staffordshire Potteries.” Besides being one of the most
   clever and energetic potters, “he was a good scholar, and a
   man of pure taste; he had read extensively, and his memory
   was tenacious in a very extraordinary degree. He was equally
   distinguished for his moral and convivial habits of mind, for
   the soundness of his intellect and the goodness of his heart.
   He spoke fluently the French, Dutch, and German languages, and
   was learning the Italian up to the very period of his death.” He
   retained his activity of body and mind to the last, and, though
   eighty-six years of age, set out the day preceding his death to
   walk to Cobridge. He died while a friend was reading to him. Mr.
   Warburton, who was a Roman Catholic, was twice married. For some
   years before his decease he had retired from business, and died
   at his residence, Ford Green, in the parish of Norton.

          *       *       *       *       *

   _William Clowes_, of Port Hill, was, it is said, only a sleeping
   partner in the concern.

          *       *       *       *       *

   _Charles Bagnall_, of Shelton, who had previously been
   with Joshua Heath, was a potter of considerable experience, in
   the middle of last century. He was probably a son of the potter
   of the same name, who was a maker of butter-pots in Burslem in
   1710–15. He became one of the partners in the New Hall Works a
   century ago. The family has been connected with Staffordshire
   for many generations.

The company, being thus formed, purchased the patent right from
Richard Champion, who removed into Staffordshire to superintend the
establishing of the new works in that county. The first operations of
the company were conducted at the works of one of the partners, Anthony
Keeling, at Tunstall, the pottery formerly belonging, as just stated,
to his father-in-law, Enoch Booth. Tunstall at this period was a mere
small street, or rather roadway, with only a few houses--probably
not more than a score--scattered about it and the lanes leading to
Chatterley and Red Street. To this spot, the forerunner of the present
large and important town, Cookworthy’s patent was brought, and here,
with the experienced potters who had become its purchasers, and
under the management of Champion, who had produced such exquisite
specimens of art at Bristol, and who had been induced, as a part of
the arrangement, to superintend the manufacture, the first pieces
of china made in Staffordshire, with the exception of the trial
pieces of Littler, were produced. To accommodate the new branch of
manufacture at Keeling’s pot-works some alterations of course became
necessary, and thus it was some little time before the partners had
the satisfaction of seeing anything produced under the patent-right
which they had purchased. Among the partners, too, some disagreements
arose, which ended in John Turner and Anthony Keeling withdrawing
from the concern, and about 1780 Keeling is said to have removed to
London. This withdrawal and disagreement caused the remaining partners
to remove their work from Keeling’s premises, and they took a house
in Shelton, known as “Shelton Hall,” afterwards the “New Hall,” in
contradistinction to the “Old Hall,” celebrated as being the birthplace
of Elijah Fenton, the poet. At this time Shelton Hall, which had been
purchased in 1773 of Alice Dalton, widow, (who had inherited it from
her brother, Edward Burslem Sundell,) by Humphrey Palmer, was occupied
by his son, Thomas Palmer, as a pot-works. In 1777, Humphrey Palmer,
intending a second marriage with Hannah Ashwin, of Stratford-on-Avon,
gave a rent-charge of £30 on the Hall and pot-works, and a life
interest in the rest of the estate, as a dower to that lady, reserving
the right for his son, Thomas Palmer, the potter, to get clay and marl
from any part of the estate for his own use. In 1789, Humphrey Palmer
and his wife being both dead, the estate passed to their infant and
only child, Mary Palmer, of whose successor’s executors, after some
uninteresting changes, it was, as will be seen, ultimately purchased by
the china manufacturers. At this time the works had been considerably
increased, and they grew gradually larger, till, in 1802, they are
described as three messuages, three pot-works, one garden, fifty acres
of land, thirty acres of meadow, and forty acres of pasture, &c. About
the time of the withdrawal of Keeling and Turner from the partnership,
and the removal of the works from Tunstall to Shelton, Richard Champion
left.

Fairly settled at New Hall, the company took for their manager Mr.
John Daniel, who afterwards became a partner in the concern. The
firm, as at first formed at Shelton, consisted of Messrs. Hollins,
Warburton, Clowes, and Bagnall, but was afterwards carried on by
Hollins, Warburton, Clowes, and Daniel. A considerable quantity
of china was produced under the patent, but the most extensive and
profitable branch of the New Hall business was the making and vending
of the glaze called “composition,” made of materials to whose use the
company had the exclusive right. This “composition,” made from the
ingredients given in the specification printed in my account of the
Bristol works, was supplied by the New Hall firm to the potters of the
neighbourhood, and even sent to other localities, to a large extent
and at a highly remunerative price. The ware made at this period was
precisely similar in body and glaze to that of Bristol, to which, from
the fact of some of the same artists being employed, it bears also a
marked resemblance in ornamentation. In 1796 the patent, which had been
enjoyed successively by Cookworthy, Champion, and the Staffordshire
company, for a period of twenty-eight years, expired; but the company
continued to make the hard paste china, and to supply “composition”
(many potters finding it more convenient still to purchase instead of
making that essential) to other manufacturers. In 1810, the firm--then
consisting of four partners, viz., Samuel Hollins, of Shelton, Peter
Warburton (son of Jacob Warburton), of Cobridge, John Daniel, of
Hanley, and William Clowes, of Port Hill--became the purchasers of the
New Hall estate for the sum of £6,800. In 1813 Peter Warburton died,
leaving his share in the works to his father (Jacob Warburton) and John
Daniel, as trustees under his will. In 1821, John Daniel died, and two
years afterwards Samuel Clowes died also. John Daniel, I presume, was a
son of Ralph Daniel, to whom the potters were indebted for discovering
the system of making moulds in plaster of Paris instead of in brass,
as previously done. Mr. Daniel is said to have visited the potteries
and porcelain manufactories in France, and brought back with him a
mould of cast plaster of Paris, which he showed and introduced to the
English makers. The potters, however, knew so little of the process by
which the mould was produced, that they got blocks of the gypsum of
Derbyshire and _cut_ their moulds in them, until it was explained
that the gypsum must be first burnt and ground, and then cast. This
circumstance is so graphically described in the “Burslem Dialogue,”
given by Ward, that I transcribe the few following lines for my
readers’ amusement:

   “_Telwright._--That wur a queer trick, wur it no’, o’ Rafy
   Dennil’s?

   “_Leigh._--Dun yo’ meeon th’ cause o’ his gooin’ to France,
   or es ha he geet int’ th’ work hâisn theer, an seed’n aw ha they
   did’n wi ther ware?

   “_Telwright._--Oi meeon him foindin’ aat i’ whot wey they
   mayd’n ther mewds (moulds).

   “_Leigh._--That wur a fawse trick, for sartin, an o’ gret
   yewse to th’ treyde. Bu’ wot a blunder th’ mesters here mayd’n,
   when he sent ’em word abaat it!

   “_Telwright._--Haa dust meeon, Rafy? Oi am no’ properly
   insens’t on’t.

   “_Leigh._--Whoy, yo’ seyn as haa they geet’n th’ plaster-ston’
   fro’ Darbyshur aw reet; bu’ then, i’stid o’ fust groindin’ it
   an’ bakin’ into dust loike fleawr, an usin’ th’ dust wi wayter
   for t’ cast on th’ moddills, as they cawn ’em, th’ mesters had
   th’ raw ston’ cut i shapes, an’ tryd’n for t’ mak things oof
   ’em; bu’ they cudna. Then at last he sent ’em full word haa to
   dew it.”

Hard paste porcelain continued to be made at New Hall until about
the year 1810 or 1812, when the bone paste, which had been gradually
making its way in the district, finally superseded it, and the company
continued their works on the newer system. In 1825 the entire stock of
the concern, which had for a short time been carried on for the firm by
a person named Tittensor, was sold off, and the manufacture of china of
any description entirely ceased at New Hall.

The works, after having been closed for a short time, were next opened
as an earthenware manufactory by Mr. William Ratcliffe, who for a few
years continued to make the commoner description of white and printed
earthenware for ordinary home consumption. They next passed, in 1842,
into the hands of Messrs. W. Hackwood & Son, who removed from their
works near Joiner Square (now called the “Eastwood Pottery”) for that
purpose; and seven years later, Mr. Hackwood senior having died, they
were continued by the son, Thomas Hackwood. The goods were the ordinary
descriptions of earthenware, principally for Continental markets, and
bore the name of HACKWOOD impressed. In 1856, they passed into the
hands of Messrs. Cockson & Harding, who continued to manufacture the
same descriptions of goods, using for a mark C & H, LATE HACKWOOD,
impressed on the bottom.

In 1862, Mr. Cockson having retired from the concern, the works were
carried on by the remaining partners, Messrs. W. and J. Harding
(Brothers), who did an extensive trade with Holland and Italy. Besides
the cream-coloured and printed wares for foreign trade, druggists’
fittings formed a staple branch. Black, Egyptian, Rockingham, and
tinted wares too were made. In 1872 Messrs. Harding gave up the
business, when Mr. John Aynsley, china manufacturer, of Longton,
purchased the back portion of the works and let it to its present
occupiers, Messrs. Thomas Booth & Sons. The entire front of the New
Hall Works was purchased by Mr. Henry Hall, metal mounter of jugs,
tea-pots, &c., so that the manufactory became divided into two
distinct properties. The portion occupied by Messrs. Booth having been
burnt down has been rebuilt.

The productions of Messrs. Booth & Sons are the usual classes
of ordinary earthenware in printed, painted, enamelled and gilt
services; stone ware of good quality, in which a large variety of
jugs and tea-pots are made; and jasper ware, in various ornamental
articles. Among their shapes of toilet ware are the “Eldon,” “Globe,”
“Alexandra,” and “Cottage;” and among their specialities in other
goods are a self-closing hot-water jug, and a molasses jug, which are
considered very successful.

  [Illustration: Fig. 458.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 459 and 460.]

Specimens of the hard paste of the New Hall Works are rare. They are
almost entirely without mark; but sometimes there is an incised letter
N as here shown. Fig. 460 exhibits a beautifully painted teapot. On
one side is a group of children playing at blind man’s buff. They
are dressed in the characteristic costume of the latter part of last
century, but what renders the group peculiarly interesting is that in
the background is a view of a pot-works, with kiln, which may probably
have been a representation of the works when this interesting piece was
made. On the opposite side of this teapot is an equally well painted
group of a boy riding on a dog, and on the lid are also two little
figure vignettes. This piece was made for, and belonged to, one of the
partners, Charles Bagnall, from whose family it passed more than half a
century ago, by marriage, to a Mr. Sutton, from whose own octogenarian
hands it passed into my own. It was painted by Duvivier, a French
artist of celebrity, who, as well as Bone, was employed at these works.
Fig. 459 is a cup and a saucer of excellent form and twisted fluting.
Fig. 462 is a jug, carefully painted with birds, and bearing in front
the initials S. D. This jug was made at New Hall for Sampson Daniel, a
cousin of John Daniel, one of the partners, and is still in possession
of his grandson, Mr. Daniel, of Hanley. The coffee cup and saucer (Fig.
464) is a good and characteristic specimen; and Fig. 463 is one piece
of a dessert service, belonging to Mr. Gray, which was made for Mr.
Daniel, one of the partners. The porcelain made at New Hall principally
consisted of tea, dinner, and dessert services, of various designs; but
figures and busts, as well as vases, were also, to some extent produced
there.

  [Illustration: Fig. 461.]

The later productions of the New Hall China Works, the soft paste, are
also scarce, especially the marked pieces. The body is of good colour,
and clear, and the decorations, especially the flowered examples, are
remarkable for the brightness of their colours. The only mark used--and
this was not, it appears, adopted until after 1820--is the one here
shown.

  [Illustration: Figs. 462 to 464.]

Batt printing was practised at New Hall, and some remarkably good
examples have come under my notice. In 1810, Peter Warburton, on behalf
of the company of which he was a partner, is said to have taken out a
patent “for printing landscapes and other designs from copper plates,
in gold and platinum, upon porcelain and pottery.” The company was also
among the first to adopt the improvements in printing on ware made by
William Brookes in the beginning of the present century.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Glass._--Joseph Glass was a potter in Hanley, in the middle of the
seventeenth century, and his works are stated to have been still
carried on by him or his son, Joseph Glass, in the beginning of the
eighteenth. “Joseph Glass ... clowdy, and a sort of dishes, painted
with different coloured slips, and sold at 3_s._ and 3_s._ 6_d._ per
dozen.” A tyg bearing his name, IOSEPH GLASS S V H G X, painted round
the body is in the Staniforth collection. Later on the works were
carried on by John Glass, and from him passed to Samuel Keeling & Co.,
then to Meakin Brothers, and lastly to Taylor Brothers. The works
were situated in Market Street, and have of late years been pulled
down. This Samuel Keeling was great nephew to the patentee, James
Keeling, mentioned on another page, who was an important manufacturer
towards the close of the last century. Mr. Samuel Keeling, one of the
patriarchs of the potteries, resided in partial retirement at Rocester.
His firm, Messrs. Keeling & Adams, hold three mills at Hanley for
grinding potters’ materials. One of them, the Eastwood Mill, consists
of two old erections combined; one portion was a pottery worked by
William Baddeley; another, the place erected by William Baddeley’s
brother James for a silk mill. They also work the Botteslow Mill and
the Albion Mill.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Twyford._--Twyford, the potter, already named, “commenced business
near Shelton Old Hall, the seat of Elijah Fenton’s family; and the only
known specimen of his manufacture,” says Shaw, “is a jug made for T.
Fenton, Esq.,” then in the possession of his descendant. Mr. Twyford
and his children and grandchildren continued as potters, and are now
represented by Mr. Thomas Twyford, of the Bath Street Works.

In 1829 the manufactories named by Shaw were E. Mayer & Son; Job Meigh
& Son (Old Hall); Dimmock & Co.; Toft & May; J. Keeling; W. Hackwood;
T. Taylor; J. Glass; J. & W. Ridgway; Hicks, Meigh, & Johnson; H.
Daniel & Sons; J. Yates; and Hollins, Warburton, Daniel, & Co. (New
Hall).

       *       *       *       *       *

_Mare_ or _Maer_, or _Mayer_.--In the early part of the last century
Hugh Mare and John Mare were potters at Hanley, and produced black and
mottled wares. Later on were “Elijah Mayer” or “E. Mayer,” then “Elijah
Mayer & Son,” and next “Joseph Mayer.”

Other potters in the early part of last century were William Simpson,
Richard Marsh, Moses Sandford, and John Ellis. Several of these and
later potters will be named in the course of the notices of existing
manufactories. The potteries in Hanley and Shelton enumerated by
Ward in 1843 are the Old Hall, the New Hall, Cauldon Place, William
Ridgway and partners (six manufactories), Thomas Dimmock & Co. (three
manufactories--formerly James Whitehead, J. and W. Handley, Edmund
John Birch, and Christopher Whitehead); Samuel Keeling & Co., formerly
John Glass; William Hackwood; Samuel and John Burton, formerly James
Keeling; Samuel Mayer, formerly Sarah Brown’s; Thomas Furnival, junior,
& Co., formerly Reuben Johnson’s; George Lomas, formerly Barlow and
Hammersley’s; Joseph Clementson, formerly Elijah Jones’s (who was a
potter about 1760); Yates & May, formerly John and William Yates,
successors to their father; William Dudson, formerly William Rivers
& Co.; William White, formerly Poulson’s; Henry Mills, then newly
erected, and other smaller factories. Edward Phillips was also a
manufacturer, and used his name in full, “Edward Phillips, Shelton,
Staffordshire,” on his goods. Other names are J. Sneyd, Toft & May, and
T. Taylor.

       *       *       *       *       *

_John Twemlow_ was in business in 1797. An invoice in my possession
is curious as showing some of the goods he made. These are “E Black
Teapots, capt., fest^{d.} and fig^{d.}” (Egyptian black tea-pots,
capped, festooned, and figured); “ditto upright, fest^{d.} and
fig^{d.}”; “Oval E Black Teapots;” ditto “prest leaf,” “scollop top,
fest^{d.} and fig^{d.} and banded”; “ditto, prest leaf and fest^{d.}
and fig^{d.} and banded a’tip;” “ditto creams” to match; “ditto
fluted;” “ditto coffee pots;” octagon tea-pots, with scollop top, and
creams to match; oval plain tea-pots (all, so far, are in Egyptian
black); “blue and enamelled handled cups and saucers, London size,
sprig and border and vine pattern;” “bowls to match.”

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Illustration: Figs. 465 to 468.--1851--Exhibits of Mr. Meigh,
  Old Hall Works.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 469.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 470.]

_Old Hall Works._--The “Old Hall Works” are among the most interesting
historically of any in the district, being built on the site of, or
quite closely adjoining to, the “Old Hall” or Manor House of the
Colclough family, who formerly held the lordship of Hanley, from
about the time of Edward III. until about a century and a half ago,
when it passed into the family of Bagnall. The “Old Hall” or “Manor
House” has long since disappeared. The present works were built about
the year 1770, by Mr. Job Meigh, on what, I believe, was for a time
previously a salt-glazed white stoneware pottery, carried on by a Mr.
Whitehead. From 1770 until 1861 the works were uninterruptedly carried
on by Mr. Job Meigh, his son, and his grandson (Mr. Charles Meigh),
successively. In 1861 Mr. Charles Meigh transferred the business to a
limited liability company, called “The Old Hall Earthenware Company,”
by whom it is still carried on. The productions of the works include
every variety of earthenware, from the most highly decorated to the
ordinary blue printed and plain white wares, stone ware, jet ware, and
parian. In earthenware all the usual dinner, tea, breakfast, dessert,
toilet, and other services, and all other articles are made. In these
the body is of the finest quality, hard and of remarkable durability,
and the glaze is hard, clear, and faultless. Many of the patterns of
dinner services are of great beauty and elegance. Especially among
these are the “Nonpareil,” the “Verona,” and the “Koh-i-noor” shapes,
which last is one of the most simply elegant yet produced. The form of
the covered dishes is chaste and remarkably effective. They stand upon
well-modelled feet, and the handles are formed of folds of ribbon held
together by jewelled rings. This pattern is produced in various styles
of decoration, one of the most pleasing of which is the convolvulus,
exquisitely coloured after nature; the gilding is rich and substantial.
Among the patterns produced by the staff of artists here employed are
many others of surpassing beauty; the excellence of the painting,
the gilding, the jewelling, and the enamelling, being very apparent
in all, and the combination of printing and hand painting carried to
great perfection. The transfer printing at the Old Hall Works is more
carefully done, and the colours are clearer and brighter, than at most
manufactories. Dessert services are made in every style of decoration;
the richer and more costly varieties being equal to any produced by
other firms, both in quality of body, in shape, in pattern, and in
artistic treatment. Toilet services form a very extensive branch of
the productions, and in these the firm is very successful. Among the
more popular shapes are the “Buckle,” “Richmond,” “Perth,” “Exeter,”
and “Mediæval,” and these are produced in every possible style of
decoration whether in printing, painting, enamelling, and gilding. In
stone ware, jugs of good and faultless form, and many other articles
are produced. In black ware, water-bottles, elegant little table
tea-kettles, spill cases, vases, and other articles are made, and are
effectively decorated with dead and burnished gilding, enamelling, &c.

  [Illustration: Figs. 471 to 473.--1851. Exhibits of Messrs.
  Meigh, Old Hall Works.]

In Parian, vases, groups, busts, figures, and other ornamental articles
are produced; the body is of good quality, and the modelling and finish
of faultless excellence.

The marks of these works are the following:

  [Illustration: Figs. 474 to 478.]

In 1851 medals were awarded to Mr. C. Meigh, of these works, who has
also received medals from the Society of Arts.

Figs. 465 to 468 are stoneware jugs, one of which bears a young
bacchanal imbibing the juice of the grape, and Fig. 470 a candlestick
adapted from a celebrated wine cup, the work of Cellini. Figs. 471,
472, 473 exhibit three admirable pieces, a clock case, a vase, and a
drinking cup or tankard, all in statuary porcelain and of the finest
possible style of art. The works are very extensive, including mills
for grinding all descriptions of materials used in the manufacture
of pottery, and are capable of supplying a large demand. The markets
principally supplied are the home, French, German, Indian, American,
Australian, and colonial.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Broad Street Works._--These works are interesting as being the place
where the celebrated “Mason’s Patent Ironstone China,” as well as
the “Ironstone China” of the old firm of Hicks, Meigh, and Johnson,
in addition to most varieties of useful earthenware, are made. Mr.
Charles James Mason, the inventor of this famous “Mason’s Ironstone
China,” was a potter of great taste and skill at Lane Delph (now
Middle Fenton), and in 1813 took out a patent for his process. The
manufacture was at that time carried on under the styles of “G. M.
and C. J. Mason” and “C. J. Mason & Co.” The partners were Charles
James Mason and his brother George Miles Mason (father of Mason the
artist) who in 1832 unsuccessfully contested the then new district
borough of Stoke-upon-Trent, his successful competitors being Josiah
Wedgwood and John Davenport, both, like himself, manufacturers in the
district. After a time Mr. G. Mason retired from the concern, and
it was then continued by the patentee alone. The concern, however,
for want of capital and from other causes, gradually dwindled down,
until at length, in 1851, Mr. Francis Morley purchased the patent,
the moulds, copper-plates (on which an immense amount of money had
been expended), and entire business, from Mr. Mason, and removed the
whole to his manufactory. Mr. Morley, who married a daughter of Mr. W.
Ridgway, and was a partner in the firm of Morley, Wear & Co., succeeded
to the old-established concern of Hicks, Meigh, & Johnson, which he
carried on for a time under the style of “Ridgway & Co.” Afterwards
Mr. Morley continued the business as F. Morley & Co. This manufactory
was one of the oldest in the Potteries. It was in existence in the
early part of the last century (probably established about 1720), and
afterwards belonged to John Baddeley (in 1750 R. and J. Baddeley), an
eminent potter, who died in 1772. Here, it is said, printing in oil was
first practised. Messrs. Hicks, Meigh, & Johnson were among the most
successful of the manufacturers in the district, and produced, among
other wares, a remarkably good quality of ironstone china. Besides
this, they were large manufacturers of earthenware of the ordinary
and finer kinds, and of china. They and Mason were the only makers of
ironstone china; and when Mr. Morley, who purchased their business,
became also the owner of Mason’s process and of his moulds, plates,
&c., he became the _only_ manufacturer of ironstone ware. Having united
the two manufactories, he removed Mason’s concern to his own works,
where he entered with spirit into the manufacture, and soon established
a lucrative business in “Mason’s wares.” In 1856 a first-class medal
for this ware was awarded at the French Exhibition.

Mr. Morley retired from trade in 1859, having sold the entire business,
moulds, copper-plates, &c., to the present owners, Messrs. Geo. L.
Ashworth and Taylor Ashworth (brothers), who continue, to the fullest
extent, the manufacture of the “Patent Ironstone China,” which they
and their predecessor named the “Real Ironstone China” (of which
patented articles they are the _only_ makers) on their marks, and
produce all Mason’s best patterns in services, vases, &c., made from
his original models. They also manufacture Meigh’s ironstone, from his
old moulds, &c. This manufacture has been very largely developed by
Mr. Taylor Ashworth (who studied the processes under Mr. Morley, and
is the resident acting partner), to whom the art is indebted for many
improvements. This gentleman, who married the grand-daughter of Mr.
Meigh, obtained by that alliance a vast deal of valuable information
about the working of the stoneware; and it is a somewhat singular
and pleasant circumstance to record, that after a lapse of half a
century, or more, the manufacture may, through that marriage, be said
again to be brought into the old family. Messrs. Ashworth, besides
these great features of their trade, make table, toilet, dessert, and
other services, and ornamental goods of the best quality, in every
description of general earthenware. These they produce in immense
quantities, both for home and foreign markets, about one-third of the
whole being exported. The ordinary classes are principally exported to
Russia, India, &c., and the more rich and costly to Havanna, Spain,
and other countries. Sanitary wares are also produced, as well as
insulators for our own and for foreign governments. The “Ironstone
China,” from its extreme hardness and durability (for it is not easy
to break even a plate) is specially adapted, in its simpler styles
of decoration, for services used by large steamship companies,
hotels, clubs, colleges, and other places where hard usage has to be
undergone; while in its more elaborate and rich styles--and it is
capable of the very highest degree of finish--it is eminently fitted
for families of the higher ranks. No climate affects this ware. The
usual style of decoration for dinner services is imitation of Oriental
patterns--Japanese and Indian flowers, &c.--and the colours and gilding
are rich in the extreme. In vases and jugs the handles are usually
dragons and other grotesque animals. The Indian vases are of perfect
form, of exquisite design, rich in their colours, and massive in
gilding. They are priceless Art-treasures, and examples of Ashworth’s
make deserve to be in every “home of taste.”

The marks used by Mason were principally the following:

  [Illustration: Figs. 479 to 483.

  MASON’S PATENT IRONSTONE CHINA

  MASON’S PATENT IRONSTONE CHINA.

  MASON’S PATENT IRONSTONE CHINA ASHWORTHS.

  MASON’S PATENT IRONSTONE CHINA.

  PATENT·IRONSTONE·CHINA]

Figs. 479 to 481 are printed, usually in blue, on the bottoms of the
pieces, and Figs. 482 and 483, impressed in the body of the ware.

After the patent passed out of Mason’s hands into those of Morley and
Co., the mark was changed on more than one occasion. The principal one
was

                                 REAL
                               IRONSTONE
                                 CHINA

impressed in the ware, and the royal arms, with supporters, crest,
motto, &c., above the words IRONSTONE CHINA, printed on the bottom of
the goods. The marks used by Messrs. Ashworth are, a circular garter,
bearing the words “Real Ironstone China,” and enclosing the royal arms
and the name “G. L. Ashworth & Bro^s, Hanley;” Mason’s mark (Fig. 488)
with the addition of the word

                               ASHWORTH
                                 REAL
                               IRONSTONE
                                CHINA.

ASHWORTHS; a crown, with the words ASHWORTH BRO^S. above, and a ribbon
bearing the words REAL IRONSTONE CHINA beneath it; and the royal arms,
with supporters, crest, motto, &c., and the words, IRONSTONE CHINA.

Mason at one time produced what he called Bandana or Sandana ware.
In this jugs and other articles were made, and were of a peculiarly
striking and rich character in printing. The designs were complicated
Indian foliage and grotesque animals, printed in red and black on a
buff or other ground. The name I presume to have been taken from the
famous Bandana handkerchief patterns. The mark, on a jug in my own
possession, is a circular garter bearing the words, “Mason’s Bandana
Ware, 1851,” and enclosing the words “Patentee of the Patent Ironstone
China,” the whole surmounted by a crown. I have an impression of a
similar mark, which for some purpose has evidently been altered to
Sandana, and the date to 1801. As Mason’s patent was only granted in
1813 the alteration of this mark is very palpable.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Cauldon Place._--These works were founded about 1794, and the present
manufactory built in 1802, by Mr. Job Ridgway, father of John and
William Ridgway, the eminent potters; and were carried on by him and
his sons until his death in 1814, under the style of “Ridgway & Sons.”
The business was then continued by his two sons for some years, when
a dissolution of partnership took place, the elder, John Ridgway,
continuing the Cauldon Place Works, and the younger, William Ridgway,
removing to a new manufactory which he had erected. Mr. John Ridgway
continued, with various changes of partners, under the firm of “John
Ridgway & Co.,” until 1855, when the Cauldon Place business passed
into the hands of the present firm of “T. C. Brown-Westhead, Moore, &
Co.”; Mr. Ridgway continuing his connection with it until 1858, when
he finally retired. Mr. W. Moore had for many years previously been a
valuable assistant of Mr. Ridgway. He died in 1866, and his brother,
Mr. James Moore, succeeded to the management of the potting department,
and was admitted into partnership in 1875; in that management he is
assisted by his nephew, Mr. Frederick T. Moore, son of Mr. W. Moore.
By the present firm the premises have been considerably enlarged, and
another manufactory, “_The Royal Victoria Works_,” has been added, and
this business, which formerly was confined to the home and American
markets, extended to all foreign ports. Mr. Ridgway, who was “Potter
to the Queen,” was awarded in 1851 a Prize Medal for the excellent
quality of his ware, the jurors in their report stating that the
firm was one of the most important in the Staffordshire Potteries.
In 1862 the present proprietors also received a similar distinction.
The productions of this manufactory are, and have uniformly been, the
useful varieties of china and earthenware, of elegant forms, where
applicable, and of various styles of decoration. Table, tea, breakfast,
and toilet services in fine earthenware, printed or otherwise
decorated, and in china, in endless variety of forms and patterns,
are produced in immense quantities. The firm has also introduced
improvements in druggists’ and perfumery goods, anti-corrosive tops,
&c. Parian is also, to a small extent, produced. A great feature of
the manufactory is sanitary ware, which is of the highest quality and
reputation, and is made up in a variety of ways for cabinet fittings,
plug-basins, lavatories, drinking-fountains, &c. In some of the largest
articles, such as the “Toilettes Victoria,” which were used by the
Imperial family and elsewhere in Paris, they have accomplished results
which have never before been attained or attempted as to magnitude and
finish of goods.

In 1843, Mr. William Ridgway, younger son of Job Ridgway, held, with
his partners--composing three or four distinct firms of which he was
head--six different manufactories in Hanley and Shelton. These were,
1st, a china manufactory in Hanley, formerly worked by George, and
afterwards by Thomas, Taylor; 2nd, the earthenware works late belonging
to Elijah Mayer & Son; 3rd, the pot-works formerly worked by Robert
Wilson and next by Philips & Bagster, where ordinary earthenware and
high-class chemical goods were made; 4th, the pot-works previously
belonging to Toft & May; 5th, the “Bell Bank” works, in Shelton,
formerly George Ridgway’s; and 6th, the old manufactory formerly
belonging to John Baddeley (where printing with oil is said to have
been first introduced) and next to Hicks, Meigh, & Johnson.

The goods produced at Cauldon Place embrace almost every description
of ceramics. In earthenware all the usual table and toilet services,
and useful and ornamental articles of every class are made. The quality
is peculiarly good, hard, compact, and durable, and the patterns
chaste and effective. They are produced in white and in every variety
of printed, flown, enamelled, painted, and gilt patterns. In china,
which in body and glaze is of the highest quality and of peculiar
durability, an immense variety of services and articles are produced,
and all are equally good in point of artistic decoration; the ground
colours, whether rose du Barry or otherwise, of a remarkable purity
and evenness, and the gilding, both dead and burnished, of unusual
solidity. The same remarks apply with equal force to the dessert ware,
some of the patterns of which are of surpassing loveliness and give
evidence of the highest and most successful cultivation of decorative
art. One special design has an outer rim, so to speak--for the plate
itself is perfect without it--formed of loops of ribbon standing out
clear from the beaded edge of the plate. This simple but graceful
arrangement imparts a lightness and elegance to the service which are
quite refreshing. Another has the rim formed of rays of pellets with
a pleasing and novel effect; the tripod stands of the comports being,
like the plates, exquisitely modelled and richly painted and gilt.
Other patterns, notably one with a rich maroon ground and white bead
edge, are, besides being exquisitely painted and gilt, enriched with
jewelling. Vases of pure and severe taste in form, and displaying great
skill and judgment in decoration, are also produced, as are likewise
jugs of faultless excellence. Among other elegant articles Messrs.
Brown-Westhead, Moore & Co., have a sandwich-box of white china; it
is of wicker or basket work, with a fern leaf laid across the lid, on
which rests the butterfly which forms the handle. At each corner hangs
a piece of stem bent into a ring and tied into form with a ribbon. This
ribbon and the butterfly being tinted in azure with enamel, and all the
rest of pure white, give a purity and simplicity to this design that
are very gratifying to the eye. Equal with this is an elegant basket,
also in white china, which forms an attractive addition to table
decoration. In services a novel idea has been introduced by this firm.
The handle is formed of a double cord, doubled and passed through a
loop, and either tied around the rim or formed into four knots as feet.
The design is simple, but one of the prettiest and most striking yet
introduced. A rose du Barry cup and saucer, with the cord and knots in
white heightened with gold, and on embossed gold lines, is peculiarly
elegant. Another admirable contrivance, which has been patented by
Toft, and is produced at the works, is a self-acting lid or cover for
hot-water jugs, &c. By this contrivance, the lid is hung on a pivot or
axle, which fits into a notch on each side the mouth of the vessel,
so that, being lightly hung, it opens whenever the jug is sloped for
pouring, and closes again when held or set down in an upright position.
It is, without exception, the best and most effective plan yet brought
out, and one that cannot be superseded.

In 1876–7 Messrs. Browne-Westhead, Moore & Co. manufactured for the
Prince of Wales a splendid and costly china dessert service, decorated
with finely painted hunting subjects, no two pieces being alike.
They also made for the Imperial family of Russia, richly decorated
dinner, tea, dessert, and breakfast services, all of which orders were
obtained in competition with the Sèvres, Dresden, and other Continental
manufactories; and also services for the Emperor of Morocco, including
punch bowls of extraordinary largeness. In addition to this it is
interesting to record that they also made for H.R.H. the Duchess of
Edinburgh a series of toilette services from designs drawn by herself.

  [Illustration: Figs. 484 to 491.--Productions of the Cauldon
  Place Works.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 492 to 499--Philadelphia Exhibits of the
  Cauldon Place Works.]

In 1825 Messrs. John and William Ridgway took out a patent for “an
improved cock, tap, or valve, for draining off liquors:” in 1840,
John Ridgway took out another for “certain improvements in the moulds
used in the manufacture of earthenware, porcelain, and other similar
substances, whereby such moulds are rendered more durable” by having a
face of “pitcher;” in the same year, in conjunction with George Wall,
for “certain improvements in the manufacture of china and earthenware,
and in the apparatus or machinery applicable thereto;” in the same
year again, the same two, for “certain improvements in the mode of
preparing bats of earthenware and porcelain clay, and of forming or
shaping them into articles of earthenware and porcelain, and in the
machinery or apparatus applicable thereto;” in 1847, John Ridgway,
for “certain improvements in the manufacture of paste boxes, and other
similar articles in china or earthenware, or other plastic materials”;
and in 1852 for “certain improvements in the method or process of
ornamenting or decorating articles of glass, china, earthenware,
and other ceramic manufactures.” These are, applying “the art of
electrotype or electro-metallurgy” for the above purpose, applied as
“described, or by any other suitable process; provided always that
the surface of the non-conducting body is so prepared that the metal
deposited thereon shall become alloyed or combined therewith.” The
invention, however, is said to consist “in the application of certain
novel and peculiar media,” “whereby such surface may be caused to
combine with gold, silver, copper,” &c. Before coating with the metals,
the vessels are covered thinly with some varnish, dried, and immersed,
first in a solution “of phosphorus reduced by bisulphuret of carbon,”
then in nitrate of silver, and set aside to dry. Instead of this,
“phosphoric vapour” or “a solution of phosphorus in sulphuric ether”
may be employed; but the method preferred is brushing them over with
“an impalpable powder of carburet of iron and sulphate of copper” in
certain proportions; afterwards the vessels are “corroded by means of
the fumes of hydrofluoric acid.”

It may be added, that in the application of photography to the
decoration of porcelain this firm has achieved a perfect success so
far as the art is concerned, and has produced some splendid specimens,
which show how completely and how thoroughly they are artists as well
as manipulators. This feature, although not one, unfortunately, at
present made to much extent commercially available, is one which cannot
but attract attention, along with the sanitary and other classes of
goods, to this establishment.

The marks used by the Cauldon Place Works, so far as I am aware, are
the following:

  [Illustration: Figs. 500 to 502.]

A shield, quarterly, 1 and 4 gules, 2 or, 3 azure, over all on a bend
argent B-W. M. & Co.; the shield surmounted by a crown, and surrounded
by a garter with the name of the pattern.

  [Illustration: Figs. 503 and 504.]

Medals have been awarded at the Exhibitions of London, 1851, 1862,
Paris 1855, Lyons 1872, and Vienna 1873; at the latter, two medals,
one for excellence of earthenware and china and the other for
sanitary goods, were awarded. The firm were large contributors to the
Philadelphia Exhibition of 1876; some of their exhibits are shown in
Figs. 484 to 499.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Trent Pottery._--These works, in Joiner Square, were built by Messrs.
Stanway, Horne, and Adams, the present proprietors, in 1859, and
they have been carried on without change since that time. The works
were established for the production of ornamental goods in parian,
and useful goods of an improved design in stoneware and ordinary
earthenware, and these have continued to extend themselves year by
year. The great speciality is their cheap ornamental parian, in which
jugs of various kinds, vases, figures, groups, busts, and a large
number of other articles are made; of these they are large makers,
not less than 460,000 pieces of these alone being made and disposed
of during one year. Notably, among the designs for jugs and cream
ewers, are the Indian corn, pine-apple, shell, and dolphin patterns;
the first of these is of peculiar elegance. Vases and other chimney
ornaments are produced of excellent design and of various sizes. Of
late years, classical statuettes, groups, busts, &c., in Parian, have
been made, and are a prominent feature of the works; they are well and
cleverly modelled, and the quality of the body is remarkably good. A
group of “Commerce,” seated, is one of the most effective. The great
and laudable aim of the “Trent Works” has been the production of good
average designs in Parian at a cheap rate, so as to place them within
the reach of all; in this they have eminently succeeded. Stone ware,
lustre ware, and terra cotta, are also produced, and of late the
manufacture of pearl china has been added. The markets supplied are the
home, United States, the Continent, etc. No mark is used.

“The members of this firm, namely, Mr. John Stanway, Mrs. Thomas Horne
(Mr. Stanway’s sister), and Mr. Thomas Adams,” writes my good friend
Mr. Goss, “are all natives of Etruria, where their grandfathers were
the valued servants of the great Josiah Wedgwood. Mr. Stanway’s father
was the William Stanway mentioned by Mr. Jewitt in his ‘Life of Josiah
Wedgwood,’ as one of the ‘Etruria Jubilee Group of Francis Wedgwood,
Esq., and nine workmen, whose average term of servitude is fifty-four
and a half years, November, 1859;’ and Mr. Jewitt further remarks:
‘It is interesting to note that in the person of one of these men,
William Stanway, an absolute link with the great Josiah is kept up.
This man began to work at Etruria the very year of Josiah Wedgwood’s
death (1795), and has remained there ever since--a period of sixty-nine
years.’ Two others of the nine workmen of the Jubilee Group--William
Adams and John Adams--were uncles to Mr. Thomas Adams of the above
firm. Mr. John Stanway has distinct recollections of his grandfather,
John Stanway the elder, who for many years served the first Josiah,
and died in the service of the second. His occupation at the works
was that of “slipmaker” or claymaker, a position of great trust at
that time, when not only the newly-invented proportions but the very
materials used in the composition of the clays were important secrets.
It is curious to reflect that the ingredients of all the famous jasper
and other wares which the great Wedgwood produced, and which are now
numbered among the treasures of kings and emperors, were blended and
made into clay by this John Stanway the elder. Being proved a faithful
servant, he was greatly valued and favoured by his employer, spending
a portion of his time in personally waiting upon Wedgwood at Etruria
Hall, whence he used to carry valuable parcels and letters to the Three
Tuns Inn at Newcastle-under-Lyme, which was in those days the stage
coach house. After the death of Wedgwood, John Stanway retained the
same share of the confidence and favour of the second Josiah, both at
the manufactory and at the Hall. At that time the country where Etruria
now stands, and for miles around, was an uncultivated waste, and Mr.
Stanway remembers to have accompanied his grandfather many times when
he trudged along the road from Etruria Hall to Newcastle, with his
parcels on his back, and his dog Driver and his cat Molley following
him all the way, a distance of about two miles. In these journeys it
appeared to be distinctly understood between the two animals that
Driver was Molley’s protector, and the confidence of the latter was
always justified in the moment of danger. In those days old Stoke
Church (since removed) was the only church for miles around, and the
Wedgwoods had their freehold pew there, which they regularly used until
the second Josiah bought the Maer estate, near Whitmore, and removed
to it from Etruria Hall. ‘Then,’ relates Mr. John Stanway the younger,
‘Mr. Wedgwood desired my grandfather--who was a good Christian and a
regular attendant at church--to make use of that pew ever after. And
the good old man never missed attendance there on the Sabbath while he
had strength to walk. And because the distance was too great to allow
him to go home to dinner and return in time for afternoon service, he
used to take his dinner with him in the morning, and stay and eat it
in the church or schoolroom, or, when the weather was fine enough, in
the churchyard. And Mr. Wedgwood was not ashamed to be represented
in that family pew by my grandfather, altho’ the old man used to
sound his way up the aisle in wooden clogs, which it was the custom
of all workpeople to wear in those days in those parts. But although
Mr. Wedgwood was content to be represented by his faithful servant
in wooden clogs, there was an old lady, who sat in the pew behind
Wedgwood’s, who seems to have objected; and so one week she managed to
have taken down the partition between her pew and Wedgwood’s, and made
the whole into one square pew for herself. Then my grandfather meekly
took his place on the free benches, until, some time after this, Mr.
Wedgwood happened to say to him one day at the works, ‘Well, how come
you on at church, Jack?’ And my grandfather replied, ‘Well mester,
th’ owd lady i’ the pew behind has made it all into a square un’, an’
turned me out. But I’m right enow on the free bench.’ ‘Ha!’ said Mr.
Wedgwood. ‘I’ll see to that, Jack.’ And he did see to it, and undid the
old lady’s improvements, restoring his pew as before. Ever after that
my grandfather enjoyed his sitting without further interference, and
continued every Sunday to sound his way up the aisle in his wooden
clogs, with his dinner in his pocket, until at last, at a good age, he
was taken ill. Mr. Wedgwood went to see him immediately, and sent his
own physician to attend him; but after a few day’s illness he died.’”

       *       *       *       *       *

_Keeling._--James Keeling, in 1796, patented improvements in decorative
and glazing processes, and, in conjunction with Valentine Close, some
improvements in ovens, kilns, and processes of firing. His ware was of
remarkably good quality, and some of the services were decorated with
series of scenes and views.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Booth & Co._--These potters were makers of a red ware--a kind of terra
cotta--in which they produced various articles more or less ornamented
with medallions, wreaths, or other decorations, in relief; sometimes of
the same colour as the body, and at others in black. The mark was the
name, address, and date, within a border--

                     PUBLISHED BY GR. BOOTH & CO.,
                        HANLEY, STAFFORDSHIRE,
                             MAY 29, 1859.

An example occurs in the Liverpool Museum.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Stafford Street Works._--This manufactory was originally occupied
by Messrs. Reuben Johnson & Co., who produced the ordinary classes
of earthenware and stoneware. From them it passed to Messrs. Thomas
Furnival, jun. & Co., and “Furnival & Clark,” by whom it was continued
until 1851, when it was taken by the present firm, which at that time
was Livesley, Powell, & Co. In 1865 Mr. Livesley went out of the
concern, when the firm changed its name to “Powell & Bishop,” by which
it continues to the present time. Messrs. Powell & Bishop own two other
manufactories, the “Church Works” for white granite, and the “Waterloo
Works” for china (both of which see), but the Stafford Street Works
are their principal ones, or head-quarters. At these works earthenware
alone is produced, but this is of the finest quality and in every style
of decoration, both for the home, French, Australian (principally
Adelaide and Sydney), and other markets. The body is extremely hard,
compact, and durable, and whether in pure white or of a creamy tint is
clear in colour, and the glaze of faultless quality. The decoration
of the dinner services, which is a speciality of these works, ranges
from the plain white and printed goods up to the most elaborately and
gorgeously enamelled, painted, gilt, and jewelled varieties, and in
each of these stages the decorations, whether simple or complicated,
are characterized by the purest taste and the most artistic feeling.
Messrs. Powell & Bishop are the sole workers of, and possess the
exclusive right to and in, a patented process of printing in gold and
colours, originally purchased by their firm from some Austrians, by
whom it was invented. This important process has been vastly improved
by the present firm and brought to bear in a variety of ways upon their
manufactures. By this invention a background of dead gold is produced
of surpassing beauty and loveliness, and of such solidity and evenness
as is perfectly impossible to be obtained by hand-gilding even by the
most skilled artist. In this, Messrs. Powell & Bishop have produced
services of a novel and faultlessly beautiful character, the designs
of which are taken from, and are of equal gracefulness, richness, and
beauty with, mediæval MS. illuminations. In toilet services a number
of effective and well-conceived designs are produced in every style in
transfer printing, lustred, enamelled, painted, and gilt varieties,
and the shapes of the ewers are, in some instances, of unusually
good designs. Jugs are another speciality of this firm, and they are
produced in almost endless variety; many of the arabesque patterns are
of great richness and beauty, and are characterized by graceful finish
in the enamelling. The same remark will apply to the table flower-pots,
which are all that can be desired in form, pattern, and arrangement of
colours. Tea and dessert services in great variety are also made in the
finest earthenware, and of considerable variety in design. A speciality
in tea ware is a charming little teapot, modelled from the one used by
the poet Addison. It is of the form at that time so fashionable, and
made in so many styles by Lakin and Poole, Adams, and others of the
famous old potters. The reproducing of this shape was a wise thought of
Messrs. Powell & Bishop, and the way in which it is issued--excellently
enamelled and richly gilt--is in every way satisfactory. Messrs. Powell
& Bishop have recently reproduced in all its softness and delicacy of
tint, and evenness of surface, the famous old ivory or cream-coloured
ware of Josiah Wedgwood, and known as “Queen’s Ware.” In this, dinner,
tea, dessert, and toilet services of the newest shapes and designs
are made, and are among the most marked successes of the time. In this
ivory ware, ornamental goods--vases, beakers, &c.--of a more or less
highly decorated character are also successfully produced. The firm
received medals from the London International Exhibition in 1862;
from the Amsterdam Exhibition of 1869; and from the Paris Maritime
Exhibition of 1875; “le Diplôme d’excellence” and a certificate at the
1871 Exhibition. They were also large exhibitors at the Philadelphia
Exhibition of 1876.

The marks used by the firm have been simply the words

  [Illustration:

    BEST
    P & B]

impressed in the ware; and the initials P & B, in addition to the name
of the pattern, printed on the surface. The trade mark lately adopted
by the firm is the Caduceus, surmounted by the letters P. & B.; this is
now impressed on the body or printed on the surface of all their best
goods.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Church Works_, in High Street (for the history of which see page
301, “Wilson”) are old established, and passed from Mr. Ridgway, to
their present owners, Messrs. Powell & Bishop. The previous proprietors
produced the usual classes of earthenware. The present firm confine
their operations at these works to “white granite” ware for the United
States and Canadian markets, which they produce of excellent quality
and in every variety of style, both plain, embossed, and otherwise
decorated. (See “Stafford Street.”)

       *       *       *       *       *

_Waterloo Works._--These works were recently erected close to their
large mill on the canal side near Nelson Place for the manufacture of
china, by Messrs. Powell & Bishop, in place of one formerly occupied
by them but removed for town improvements. At this manufactory
china of the finest quality is made in the white; the whole of the
decoration being accomplished at their principal works in Stafford
Street (which see). In china the firm produces all the usual services
and miscellaneous articles, in every variety of decoration. In dessert
services Messrs. Powell & Bishop rank deservedly high, not only for
the faultless quality of the body and glaze and for the beauty of
their designs, but for the perfect artistic feeling and the exquisite
finish which characterize their best productions; in these, and in tea
services--to which, the above remarks with equal force apply--they
have, in some instances, introduced with excellent effect a species
of decoration which may be said to give the appearance to the various
articles of being inlaid with _ormolu_. The effect, in connection with
admirable grounds and delicately beautiful paintings, is rich and
pleasing. Messrs. Powell & Bishop also introduce with great success
their patent process of printing in gold and colours (see page 329)
upon dessert and tea services; the effect upon the fine china body
is very pleasing--the colours softened and subdued, and the gilding
remarkable for its fulness, brilliance, and precision. In tea and
breakfast and déjeuner services they have introduced many of the most
chaste and elegant patterns produced by any house, and they take rank
among the very highest and best in quality, and exhibit the highest
phases of manipulative and artistic skill. The same remarks will apply
to the table jugs--some of which have for a ground the rich deep Derby
or Sèvres blue--the candlesticks, and the rest of the articles produced
by this celebrated firm.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Kensington Works_, established by Messrs. Wilkinson & Rickuss, who
were succeeded by Wilkinson and Sons, and next by Messrs. Bailey &
Bevington. Mr. Bailey having retired, the works are now carried on
by Mr. John Bevington, who produces ordinary earthenware, ornamental
china, Parian, and stone ware; the great speciality being imitation
Dresden, for home, United States, and Australian markets. A monster
vase, the work of Rickuss & Wilkinson, exhibited 1862, is preserved in
the Museum of Practical Geology.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Burton Place Works._--Formerly carried on by Mr. S. Bevington; this
manufactory is now continued by his sons, Messrs. James & Thomas
Bevington, who have held them since 1862. The operations are entirely
confined to china, in which all the usual useful and ornamental classes
of goods are made for the home markets. Formerly, Parian statuettes and
majolica goods were made, but these are discontinued.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Clarence Street Works._--Mr. Ambrose Bevington produces china and
earthenware.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Nelson Place_, commenced in 1850 by its present proprietor, Mr. John
Bamford. These works produce ordinary stone ware and Parian.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Phœnix and Bell Works_, Broad Street.--These manufactories are both
worked by Messrs. Clementson Brothers, who make largely the white
granite and common painted ware for America and Canada. For the latter
market they also produce some good decorated ware. The back part of
the Phœnix Works was originally part of John and Edward Baddeley’s,
Broad Street Works (now Ashworth Brothers), which it adjoins. In 1832
the present business was started by Reed & Clementson, but Joseph
Clementson shortly after became sole proprietor, and in 1845 enlarged
the works to their present proportions, with the exception of a
large mill adjoining, which his sons, the present proprietors, have
completed. In 1856 Mr. Joseph Clementson purchased the Bell Works on
the other side of the road, opposite the Phœnix, formerly William
Ridgway’s. In 1867 he retired from business, leaving it to his four
sons, the present members of the firm. He died in 1871.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Bedford Works_, Bedford Road.--These extensive works were built by
Edward John Ridgway, son of William Ridgway, in November, 1866, and
to them he removed from the Church Works, High Street, where he had,
until then, carried on business in partnership with Mr. Abington.
In 1870, Mr. E. J. Ridgway took his sons into partnership, and the
concern was carried on as E. J. Ridgway & Son. In 1872, Mr. E. J.
Ridgway retired from the business, leaving it to his two sons, Messrs.
John, and Edward Ackroyd Ridgway, who were joined in partnership
by Mr. Joseph Sparks, and continue the business under the title of
Ridgway, Sparks, & Ridgway. Their productions include all classes of
fine useful earthenware, jet, stone, terra cotta, and jasper, of very
superior bodies and decoration, for the home, American, and Continental
markets. One of the great specialities of the firm is their jet ware,
highly decorated in raised enamel “after the Limoges ware.” In these
a remarkable richness, beauty, and delicacy are obtained, and the
designs, as well as the treatment of the foliage and figures, are
artistic and well considered for effect. The jet ware thus decorated
and highly gilt is of the very finest quality and of the highest
degree of excellence in design and manipulative treatment; in this the
Bedford Works are pre-eminent. Another speciality is relief decoration
on various stoneware bodies, and these are faultless in their taste
and excellent in their workmanship. The jasper (in which both tone of
colour of the body and the beauty of detail in the groups and foliage
and borders of the relief decoration in white, remind one forcibly of
the later productions of the Wedgwood’s) tea-pots and other articles
are produced and rank high as achievements of Ceramic Art. Mosaic or
inlaid decoration is also successfully carried out by the firm, and
their ordinary stoneware jugs and other articles are remarkable for
purity of design, the high relief of their ornament, the hardness and
compactness of their body, and the beauty of their workmanship. The
mark used by the firm on their white goods is the Staffordshire knot,
enclosing the letters R. S. R.

  [Illustration:

     S
    R R]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Mayer Street Works._--Mr. Samuel Lear has erected a small china works
on part of the site of the old manufactory, which includes as warerooms
and offices the residence of the Mayers. Mr. Lear produces common
domestic china, and, in addition, decorates in the ordinary way all
kinds of earthenware made by other manufacturers; a speciality being
spirit-kegs.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Mayer Street._--Mrs. Massey carries on a small earthenware works on
part of the site of the same old works just mentioned, including the
stables and coach and cart-houses of the Mayers. Her productions are of
the commoner classes.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Cannon Street._--These works, dating back to the beginning of the
present century, were for many years carried on by Mr. Thos. Ford, who
here commenced business. Mr. Ford has since built a larger manufactory
in the same street. The manufactory is now carried on by Mr. Edward
Steele, who produces earthenware of the more ordinary qualities,
stoneware of good useful character, majolica, and Parian. In stoneware
all the usual useful classes of goods are made, and many of the designs
and workmanship are of good character. In majolica both useful and
ornamental goods are made, and consist of jugs, tea-pots, brackets,
flower vases, dessert services with figure centre-pieces, comports,
etc.; the designs in many instances are artistic, and the quality, both
of the body and colouring, of more than average excellence. Parian
statuary is one of the specialities of the firm and is very extensively
made; some hundreds of different single figures, groups, busts, and
animals, besides numbers of ornamental articles, being issued. The
quality is superior to many for the American markets, and the modelling
of the figures is artistic and clear. Many of them are of large size,
and are produced with remarkable skill. Mr. Steele uses no mark.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Brewery Street._--Robert Cook makes ordinary Parian goods in large
quantities, principally for shipment to America.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Percy Street._--William Machin makes ordinary earthenware and common
coloured figures.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Taylor, Tunnicliffe & Co._, who used to manufacture in Broad Street
very excellent door furniture and other fittings for Birmingham houses,
have recently built more commodious works at Eastwood Vale.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Biller & Co._ make good door furniture and other fittings for metal
workers at Eastwood Vale.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Albion Works_, Stafford Street.--John Dimmock & Co. are very large
producers of earthenware of superior quality and finish. The firm is
very old established. The firm of Thomas Dimmock & Co., at the time
when Ward’s History was published, held three manufactories, viz., one
“in Hanley, adjoining the New Market house, formerly James Whitehead’s,
afterwards J. & W. Handley’s; another on the upper end of Shelton,
formerly of Edmund John Birch, afterwards of Christopher Whitehead; and
an enamelling and gilding establishment adjoining the King’s Head at
Shelton.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_Eastwood Vale._--W. H. Goss (see “London Road, Stoke-upon-Trent”).

       *       *       *       *       *

_Eastwood Works.-_-Formerly carried on by Mr. Thomas Twyford, and
afterwards by E. Hampton & Son, these works passed, in 1864, into the
hands of the present proprietor, Mr. George Howson. The productions are
entirely confined to sanitary ware, made of the ordinary Staffordshire
fire-clay, washed inside with a white slip; sometimes blue printed.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Dental Manufacturing Company, Limited, Broad Street._--This
manufactory was established by Mr. J. S. Crapper, in 1856, and by
him carried on and gradually developed until June, 1873, when it was
purchased from him by this Company, Mr. Crapper remaining the managing
director. The Company have other manufactories and depôts at 25,
Broad Street, Golden Square, London, and in Grosvenor Street, Oxford
Road, Manchester. It is one of the largest porcelain tooth producing
manufactories yet established.

The dento-ceramic art is, naturally, of recent origin, but it has
already almost reached perfection; the artificial teeth so closely
resembling the natural, that the false are undistinguishable from the
real. In durability nature is by this manufacture excelled; since the
porcelain tooth lasts much longer than bone or ivory. Surprising,
however, as we find the exact imitation of nature, it is, perhaps,
still more surprising to learn that it is only obtained by a variety of
at least 100 different shades and tints of colour, and of about 1,000
different shapes and sizes of teeth. Being a new branch of Ceramic Art
I have no hesitation in giving fuller details than usual. They are
furnished by my friend Mr. Goss.

   “The material of which the teeth are composed, although
   differing in the proportions of its ceramic ingredients from
   any other porcelain body, is yet strictly porcelain. It is a
   vitreous, translucent body, consisting of silica, alumina, and
   potass, with the alumina in smaller and the potass in larger
   proportions than in any other porcelain body. Feldspar is the
   chief constituent, to which some silica, in the form of quartz,
   is added, and, in some instances, a small proportion of china
   clay. The colouring materials are the oxides of titanium,
   uranium, cobalt, manganese, platinum, and gold. From these
   bases the company obtains, as before said, about one hundred
   tints and shades, ranging from the delicate blue-white--the
   poetic “pearl”--to the dark tobacco stain. We have seen an
   American account of the matter, however, in which a palette
   of thirty-nine times 64,000 varieties or gradations of colour
   is claimed from the same bases for dental selection, and the
   different shapes and sizes of teeth are estimated at 10,000
   instead of the 1,000 which the Company claims in its modesty.

   “The materials being finely ground together, the teeth are
   either cast or pressed in metal moulds, the inner surface of the
   moulds being oiled, as is usual when metal moulds are used in
   potting, to prevent the adhesion of the clay or slip. It will
   surprise most potters to learn of ceramic articles being made,
   or cast, from ‘slip’ in metal moulds; but this is successfully
   done at the company’s works, the moulds being warmed to
   facilitate evaporation and the ‘setting’ of the material, which
   is sooner effected in this body than in any other porcelain, on
   account of the small proportion of alumina in its composition.
   In those teeth which are furnished with platinum pins the
   latter are fitted into small holes in the mould before the
   casting, and the end of the pin, which is inserted into the
   tooth, being headed, the firing secures it inextractably in its
   place. The machine which cuts up and ‘heads’ the platinum wire
   is a marvellous little creature. A correspondent of an American
   paper writing of it says, ‘Here is a spitefully busy little
   machine, too busy with one particular process to tell us what
   it is doing, and yet we discover that it is eating platinum
   wire and spitting out tiny pins at the rate of _six hundred
   a minute_. Each comes out with a solid head like that of a
   brass pin, with rough indentations in the other end, so as to
   be firmly held in the plastic body of the tooth until fierce
   heat makes the union indissoluble. The strength, infusibility,
   and incorruptibility of platinum make it the close companion of
   mechanical dentistry.’ The teeth being removed from the moulds
   and sufficiently dried, are seamed and otherwise finished off
   by young ladies with very delicate handling. They are then
   placed on fire-clay trays and baked in a furnace until they are
   properly vitrified and have attained the necessary polish from
   surfacial fusion.

   “The White House, where the Company’s manufacturing operations
   are carried on, and on which stands the residence of the
   managing director, has some old potting associations and
   history. It was many years ago the residence of Mr. Richard
   Hicks, of the firm of Hicks, Meigh, and Johnson, from whose
   executor (Mr. Charles Meigh) Mr. Crapper purchased the property,
   and still retains it, letting to the Company the Porcelain Tooth
   Works. Hanging on the wall of the Company’s office is a printed
   quotation from Josiah Wedgwood:--‘All works of taste must bear
   a price in proportion to the skill, taste, time, expense, and
   risk attending their invention and manufacture. Those things
   called dear are, when justly estimated, the cheapest; they
   are attended with much less profit to the artist than those
   which everybody calls cheap. Beautiful forms and compositions
   are not made by chance, nor can they ever, in any material, be
   made at small expense. A competition for cheapness, and not for
   excellence of workmanship, is the most frequent and certain
   cause of the rapid decay and entire destruction of arts and
   manufactures.’ This quotation, beautifully and ornamentally
   lithographed, has emanated from Philadelphia, and nearly every
   dentist in the United States has a copy of it displayed in his
   operating room. Not only do our American cousins generally
   highly appreciate the productions and the career of the great
   Josiah, but the dental community especially, although they do
   not claim to be potters, proudly claim to be his followers in
   ceramic art and science.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_Trent Pottery, Eastwood._--This manufactory, situated by the side
of the North Staffordshire Canal, at Eastwood, was established in 1867
by Messrs. Livesley & Davis, and on the retirement of Mr. Livesley the
style was changed to J. H. & J. Davis (brothers). In 1875 Mr. J. Davis
retired, and since then the concern has been carried on by its present
proprietor, Mr. J. H. Davis, alone. Until latterly the productions were
confined to white granite ware for the United States, but Mr. Davis now
manufactures to a large extent dinner, toilet, and tea services, and
other articles, both for the home and foreign markets. He is also an
extensive maker of sanitary wares, lavatories, plug-basins, hoppers,
etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

_James Dudson, Hope Street Works_, established in 1800. In 1835 Mr.
James Dudson entered upon the works, and they are still carried on
by him. At one time he manufactured ornamental china figures, vases,
and services. His finest productions are white and coloured (drab,
blue, sage, &c.) stoneware jugs, tea and coffee pots, sugar-boxes,
&c.; metal-mounted goods; flower-pots, candlesticks, &c. Among
the registered designs for jugs, which have been modelled by the
best artists, are the “Fern,” “Argyle,” “Barley,” “Vine-border,”
“Pine-apple,” and “Wheatsheaf” patterns, which are produced in a
variety of colours. In tea-pots the “Damascus,” “Fern,” and “Argyle”
patterns are among the most popular. In mosaic ware Mr. Dudson makes
a variety of articles in white, drab, blue, and other bodies inlaid
with a variety of colours. In these are tea and coffee pots, sugar
bowls, jugs, &c., of different shapes, the “Tanhart” and “Cambridge”
being among the most successful. These goods are produced in large
quantities. Mr. Dudson, who received “honourable mention” in the
Exhibitions of 1851 and 1862, supplies both home and foreign markets.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Illustration: Figs. 505 to 508.]

_Victoria Works_, St. James Street.--The productions of Messrs. Adams &
Bromley, until 1873 carried on as John Adams & Co., are majolica and
jasper wares of high class, both in quality and in design, and have
given them an honourable name among the manufacturers of the district.
Parian portrait busts (among which were those of the Poet Laureate,
Lord Derby, and Mr. Gladstone) were formerly produced, and are
remarkable for their truthfulness and artistic treatment. In jasper,
besides vases and candlesticks, tea and other services, tea and
coffee-pots, table-kettles, fruit bowls, jugs, and a variety of other
decorative and useful articles, cameos and medallions, after Wedgwood,
for inlaying and other ornamental purposes, are made to a large
extent and of satisfactory quality. The jasper is in quality and in
general character of ornamentation, as well as in colour, a very close
imitation of the more modern Wedgwood ware, and the shapes of many of
the articles evince good taste in design. In majolica, bread-trays,
cheese-trays, candlesticks, flower-pots, vases, garden-seats,
jardinières, figures, and a very large variety of useful and ornamental
goods are produced. The quality of the majolica is far above the
average, and many of the designs are artistic; the workmanship in all
cases is skilful and good. Some of these productions, exhibited in
1871, are shown on Figs. 513 to 516. Since that period Messrs. Adams
& Bromley have made rapid strides in the art, and have introduced
many good patterns. Notably among these are a large flower-vase, some
four feet in height, with a well-modelled Cupid supporting the bowl;
a masterly flower-vase on mask feet, and surrounded by a wreath of
oak-leaves; another large vase in which the handles are formed of
Cupids; water-lily, and other well-conceived dessert pieces, &c. Green
glazed dessert ware is also extensively made. The mark is the names
ADAMS & CO., or ADAMS & BROMLEY, or A. & B.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Illustration:

    STONE CHINA.
    J. W. PANKHURST & Co.

  Fig. 509.]

_Charles Street Works._--This manufactory, now carried on by Messrs.
J. W. Pankhurst & Co., is one of the oldest in Hanley. About a hundred
years ago it was owned and worked by William Mellor, to whose family
the property still belongs. Mr. Mellor made the Egyptian black ware for
the Dutch markets, as did his successors Messrs. Toft & Keeling, who
also produced other varieties of earthenware. It was next carried on by
Messrs. Toft & May, and then by Robert May alone, for the manufacture
of the same goods for the Dutch markets. Mr. May was succeeded by Mr.
William Ridgway, who changed the manufacture to that of goods for the
American markets. Upon his failure the works were taken by the present
firm of J. W. Pankhurst & Co. The goods produced by this firm are
confined to white granite for the American markets. In this material,
dinner, tea, and toilet services, and all the usual useful articles are
largely produced, and are of high quality both in body and glaze. The
mark used by the firm is the royal arms and name, printed in black, on
the ware.

       *       *       *       *       *

_High Street._--The works carried on by Messrs. Gelson Brothers
until a dissolution of partnership in 1876, and now continued by
Messrs. Thomas Gelson & Co., form a part of those founded in the latter
part of last century by Elijah Mayer, who about 1820 took his son into
partnership under the style of “Elijah Mayer & Son.” It was afterwards
“Joseph Mayer” and “Joseph Mayer & Co.” In 1867, the premises were
purchased by Messrs. Gelson Brothers. Elijah Mayer was a potter of
considerable eminence, and produced an extensive variety of goods. His
Egyptian black, or basalt, ware, was, in quality of body, nearly equal
to that of Wedgwood, and the ornamentation sharp and well defined; in
this he produced tea-pots, cream ewers, bowls, and other articles. In
cream-coloured ware, services and all the usual useful articles were
made, and were of unusually good style and quality; for these and
his “brown-line” patterns he was noted. His cane-coloured, or drab,
unglazed goods were another of his famous productions; specimens of
these are not often obtainable. In the Museum of Practical Geology is
a vase of this description, with festoons of raised flowers. Elijah
Mayer produced a service commemorative of Nelson’s Trafalgar and Nile
victories, which became very popular. His mark was “E. Mayer” impressed
in the ware, and afterwards “E. Mayer & Son.” Of the later firm some
examples with the name Joseph Mayer & Co. are preserved in the
                          Hanley,

Liverpool Museum. The following note upon these works has been supplied
to me by Mr. Goss:--

   “A walled lane ran through the premises owing to a right of way
   across the property which had been acquired, to the annoyance
   of the Mayers, by a Mr. Smith, whose property lay beyond the
   manufactory, going from High Street. The division to the right
   hand included the residence of the Mayers, warehouses, offices,
   and stabling, &c. About 1833 Mr. Joseph Mayer suddenly ceased
   potting, filled his warehouses, offices, stabling, and part of
   his house with his most valuable stock, and locked it up until
   his death. He let the other part of his works, that now Messrs.
   Gelson’s, to his cousin, William Ridgway, as beforesaid. After
   Mr. Joseph Mayer’s death in 1860 the residence was converted
   into a works for mounting jugs and tea-pots, carried on by
   Thomas Booth. It is now part of the china manufactory, of Mr.
   Samuel Lear. Besides Mr. Lear’s china works there is a small
   earthenware works on the old site carried on by Mrs. Massey;
   this includes the Mayers’ stabling and coach-houses. There are
   also numerous cottage residences erected in the other spaces.”

Messrs. Gelson & Co. formerly produced the usual white granite ware
for the American market. This has been now abandoned, and they confine
themselves to the production of the highest classes of useful goods
for the home trade. In this they make dinner, tea, breakfast, toilet,
and other services in every variety of printed, enamelled, and gilt
patterns. One of their specialities is the successful imitation of the
old Dresden style, which is produced with marked success in a dinner
service. This has all the character, in general appearance, of the
antique, and is a very satisfactory reproduction of a good old pattern.
Another happy decorative idea is the introduction of Anglo-Saxon and
early Irish interlaced ornaments in bands encircling mouth ewers and
other articles.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Eagle Works._--This business, commenced at Longton in 1845, was
removed to Hanley in 1848 by Mr. James Meakin. In 1852 he retired, and
was succeeded by two of his sons, James and George Meakin. In 1859, the
business having considerably increased, the Eagle Works were erected,
and in 1868 were very considerably enlarged. Messrs. J. & G. Meakin
have also branch works at Cobridge and Burslem, and are large producers
of ordinary earthenware. All the usual classes of useful, plain, and
embossed white earthenware are produced and shipped to the United
States and most foreign ports; the speciality of the works being white
granite ware of ordinary quality, in imitation of French china. The
mark is J. & G. MEAKIN, stamped in the ware, and printed in black.

  [Illustration:

    IRONSTONE CHINA.
    J. & G. MEAKIN.

  Fig. 510.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Brook Street Works._--These works were established by Ralph Salt, and
he and his survivors, Richard Booth and Messrs. Williams & Willet,
manufactured painted china toys. In 1860 the works passed into the
hands of Mr. William Taylor, who commenced making white granite and
common coloured and painted ware. These latter have been discontinued,
and the productions are now confined exclusively to white granite ware
for the United States and Canadian markets, of both qualities--the
bluish tinted for the provinces, and the purer white for the city trade.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Cannon Street._--Charles Ford (formerly Thomas and Charles Ford)
manufactures the better class of china in tea, breakfast, dessert, and
table services for the home markets.

       *       *       *       *       *

_William Stubbs, Eastwood Pottery_, manufactures china and earthenware
services of the commoner kinds, lustres, stone ware jugs, black
tea-pots, &c., and the smaller and commoner classes of china toys and
ornaments.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Norfolk Street Works_, Cauldon Place.--These works were established by
their present proprietors, Messrs. R. G. Scrivener and Thomas Bourne
(trading under the style of “R. G. Scrivener & Co.”), in 1870, and
are situate about midway between Stoke and Hanley. Their productions
are china tea, breakfast, dessert services, and fancy articles, and
earthenware toilet and other services of a more than average degree of
artistic decoration. They export considerably to the colonies and also
supply the home markets.

The mark is simply the initials

  [Illustration:

    R. G. S.
    & Co.]

impressed, but even this is only used on some classes of goods; the
registered designs have a printed mark, with the name of the pattern
and initials of the firm.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Broad Street._--The small works occupied by Mr. Ash, as a Parian and
majolica manufactory, are of old establishment.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Albert Works_, Victoria Place.--These works were erected in 1875 by
Mr. J. Buckley, who in December of that year removed to them from
the Vine Street Works, which he had occupied from 1861. Mr. Buckley
commenced business in Hanley as a sanitary ware potter in 1836. His
productions are all the usual varieties of sanitary goods (pans, traps,
tables, &c.), ship and other fittings, toilet ware, handles for various
purposes, plumbers’ fittings, spirit casks, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Ranelagh Works._--Established in 1846 by Mr. Stephenson, these
works were next occupied by Mr. James Oldham, next by Oldham & Co.,
then by Mr. T. R. Hinde, and next Hollinshed & Staner. The productions
are the commoner classes of earthenware and stone ware, in which all
the usual services and general articles are made. No mark is used.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Swan Works_, Elm Street, established in 1835 by Samuel Bevington
as Parian works, and afterwards carried on by his son, John Bevington,
passed in 1866 into the hands of Messrs. W. L. Evans & Co., and in 1871
to Neale, Harrison & Co., who gave up the manufacturing and confined
themselves to decoration only; they were succeeded by Mr. T. R. Simpson.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Mayer Street Works_, established in 1864, by Mr. E. Hodgkinson,
for the manufacture of mosaic stone ware, Parian, and pearl-white
granite wares. In 1871 Mr. Hodgkinson was succeeded by Mr. W. E.
Cartledge.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Brook Street Works._--Messrs. Worthington & Son produce earthenware
and stoneware, both for home and foreign markets.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Dresden Works_, Tinkersclough.--In 1843 Edward Raby produced at these
works china ornaments with raised or “Dresden” flowers, hence the name.
From 1852 until 1864 they were carried on by Messrs. John Worthington
and William Harrop; from that time till 1873, by Thomas Worthington and
William Harrop; and from that time to the present by William Harrop
alone. The productions are the cheaper classes of Parian goods, and
fancy jugs in stone ware and ordinary earthenware, of good middle-class
quality, all of which are supplied both to the home and American
markets. No mark is used.

The works are situated at what is called “Tinkersclough,”--a place
whose name is said to be “derived from the fact of its being frequented
in the olden times as a place of rendezvous by Gipsies and travelling
tinkers.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_Bath Street Works._--These works were established in 1849 by
the late Mr. Thomas Twyford (father of the present proprietor), who
was a lineal descendant of the famous old seventeenth century potter,
Twyford, who with Astbury wormed out the secret of the Elers, as
detailed in vol. i. page 101. The operations of the firm are confined
to sanitary and plumbers’ ware, and wine and spirit show barrels. In
the former of these departments, Messrs. Twyford, as well as being
among the oldest, are the largest producers in the locality, and their
wares rank high for form, workmanship, and quality. The principal goods
produced are plug-basins, drinking-fountains of excellent design,
closet and bath fittings, cabinet stands, &c. These are made in every
variety of shape, and of the most approved construction. The barrels,
as usual, are more or less painted and gilt. The mark of the firm is
the Staffordshire knot enclosing the letters T T (Thomas Twyford), with
H (Hanley) beneath. Besides the home trade, Messrs. Twyford export very
largely to America, Australia, Russia, France, Germany, Spain, and
other countries. The same firm has a manufactory at Buckland for the
manufacture of cane and white sanitary ware.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Waterloo Works_, Nelson Place.--These are old-established works,
and have, with others, been occupied by Mr. W. Stubbs, Thomas Booth
and Son, Holmes and Plant, and their present proprietors, Messrs. Pugh
and Glover. The ordinary classes of earthenware in toilet and other
services, painted, enamelled, and grounded; stoneware jugs, tea-pots,
&c.; and other wares, are largely made, and of all the usual classes of
decoration, both for home and foreign markets.

       *       *       *       *       *

_New Street Pottery._--These works were established in 1873 by the
present proprietors, Messrs. Edward Banks and Thomas Thorley. Their
productions are majolica, terra cotta, jet, and stone wares, and
these they produce for both home and foreign markets. In terra cotta,
water-bottles of porous body, unglazed, of elegant forms and of a
more or less highly decorated character, with stoppers and stands;
alcorazzas; water goblets; Malaga jars; tobacco jars, &c, are made in
great variety. These porous goods are of three distinct kinds, a clear
full red, a buff, and a purplish white. They are printed, painted,
enamelled, and gilt in encircling borders, wreaths, &c.; in groups of
flowers and ferns; or in Japanese figure subjects, and are of excellent
shape and workmanship.

In majolica, cheese stands, bread trays, dessert services, jugs,
egg-holders, jardinières, flower-pots, tea-pots, ladies’ work-baskets,
water-bottles, and an infinite variety of ornamental articles are
made. Many of these are of a high degree of merit in design, and their
production is faultlessly good. Notably among the dessert services in
majolica is one with a rich chocolate-coloured ground, which throws
out, with a strikingly beautiful and rich effect, a naturally arranged
group of ivy, ferns, and anemones, which are slightly embossed, and
are coloured true to nature; this is surrounded by an embossed “key”
border and white enamel edge, and the handles are in keeping with
the ornamentation. Another striking design in majolica is a jug. The
ground of this is chocolate, and upon it are panels of rope in buff,
enclosing thistle-leaves in green. The whole design, including the
twisted rope handle, is novel and pleasing. Besides these, green glaze
dessert services, and a large variety of other articles, both useful
and ornamental, are made. The firm use no mark.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Castle Field Pottery._--These works were formerly carried on by Mr.
Ball for the manufacture of ornamental bricks. Mr. Ball “distinguished
himself as the first to bring out hollow and glazed bricks, and these
he made for Prince Albert’s Model Cottages. They were from his works
at Poole, in Dorsetshire, and matured here at Etruria.” In 1860
Messrs. Davenport & Banks established themselves at these works, and
commenced the manufacture of fancy goods of various kinds, which they
successfully carried on until 1873, when Mr. Banks retired, and was
succeeded by Mr. Beck,--the firm now being “Davenport, Beck & Co.”
The principal productions of the Castle Field Works are fancy antique
goods, in which numberless articles are made; majolica in all its
varieties; porous goods; terra-cotta water-bottles, &c.; jet ware; and
the ordinary classes in which dinner, tea, dessert, toilet, trinket,
and other services are made, both for home and foreign markets. The
mark used is a castle, and the letters “D. B. & CO. ETRURIA” within an
oval garter, bearing the words TRADE MARK.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Henry Venables_, Etruria Road, established 1860, manufactured
Etruscan-red porous goods, black basalt ware, jet glazed ware, and blue
and other coloured jaspers. In these he produced a large variety of
vases, as well as other ornamental and useful goods.




                             CHAPTER VIII.

   Etruria--Josiah Wedgwood--The Wedgwood Family--Indenture
   of Apprenticeship--Ridge House Estate--Etruria Works
   founded--Thomas Bentley--Flaxman--Catalogues of Goods--Jasper
   and other Wares--Portland Vase--Monument to Josiah
   Wedgwood--Marks--Various Productions of the Works--M. Lessore.


Having already, some years ago, written a work devoted to the life of
Josiah Wedgwood--a history of the family to which he belonged, of the
works founded by him, and of his various productions[52]--it will not
be necessary to enter at any very great length into the subject in this
chapter.

Josiah Wedgwood was born at Burslem in July, 1730, and was baptized
on the 12th of that month, the entry in the parish register being as
follows:--“1730. Josiah, son of Thomas and Mary Wedgwood, bapd. July
12th.” He was the youngest, the thirteenth, child of Thomas Wedgwood
(eldest son of Thomas Wedgwood and his wife, Mary Leigh, of the
Churchyard House and Works, Burslem), by his wife, Mary Stringer. This
Thomas Wedgwood was born in 1686–7, and his family consisted of seven
sons and six daughters. The daughters were, I believe, Maria, born in
1711; Anne, born in 1712; Mary, born in 1714; Margaret, born in 1720;
Catherine, born in 1726; and Jane, born in 1728: while the sons were
Thomas, of the Churchyard and Overhouse, born in 1716; Samuel, in 1718;
John, in 1721; Aaron, in 1722; Abner, in 1723; Richard, in 1725; and
Josiah, in 1730.

  [Illustration: Figs. 517 to 523.--Wedgwood’s Jasper Ware.]

The Wedgwoods were an ancient family of Staffordshire, being
originally, I believe, of Wedgwood in Wolstanton, where a Thomas de
Weggewood “was frankpledge, or headborough, of the hamlet of Weggewood”
in 1370; and a century later John Wedgwood, a descendant, then of
Blackwood or Dunwood, married Mary Shawe, the heiress of Harracles.
The Wedgwoods of Burslem, who belonged to this family, had, for many
generations before the birth of Josiah, been potters there, and indeed
a considerable portion of the place passed into the hands of one of
them, Gilbert Wedgwood, by marriage with Margaret Burslem, heiress of
the De Burslems, the original owners of the place, about the year 1612.
The issue of this marriage was, it appears, six sons and two daughters:
Joseph, who died without issue; Burslem, whose line became extinct in
the third descent; Thomas, who married Margaret Shaw (who survived
him, and afterwards married Francis Fynney), and had a family of seven
sons and nine daughters, and was the ancestor of the families known as
the “Overhouse Wedgwoods” and the “Church Wedgwoods,” of which latter
Josiah was a member; William; Moses; and Aaron, who was ancestor of
the family known as the “Big House Wedgwoods;” Mary, married to Broad;
and Sarah, married to Daniell. The eldest son of Thomas and Margaret,
to whom I have alluded, was John, who appears to have been born in
1654 and to have died in 1705. He had by his wife, Alice, a daughter,
Catherine, who married her cousin, Richard Wedgwood, potter, of the
“Overhouse” branch, and had by him John, an only child, who died a
minor. This lady, who survived her husband, married, secondly, Thomas
Bourne, and thirdly, Rowland Egerton, and died a widow in 1756. The
second son of Thomas and Margaret, Thomas Wedgwood, was born in 1660,
and married, in 1684, Mary Leigh. He resided, and had his pot-works
close to the churchyard at Burslem, where they still exist. By his
wife, Mary Leigh, he had a family of four sons and five daughters.
The sons were Thomas (father of Josiah), John, Abner, who died young,
Aaron, and Daniel; and the daughters, Catherine, married to her
relative, Dr. Thomas Wedgwood, jun.; Alice, married to Thomas Moore;
Elizabeth, married to Samuel Astbury; Margaret, married to Moses Marsh;
and Mary, married to Richard Clifton. Thomas Wedgwood, who succeeded
his father at the Churchyard Works, died in 1739, when his youngest and
most famous son, Josiah, was hardly nine years old (and by his will the
sum of twenty pounds, to be paid him on attaining the age of twenty,
was left), and was in turn succeeded by his eldest son, Thomas, in the
business. This Thomas Wedgwood married, in 1742, Isabel Beech, and in
his marriage settlement is described as “of the Over House, Burslem,
potter,” and probably both these and the Churchyard Works were carried
on by him.

To this Thomas Wedgwood his eldest brother, Josiah Wedgwood, was bound
apprentice on the 11th of November, 1744. The original indenture of
apprenticeship (which, with a vast number of other documents, wills,
&c., I had the pleasure to be the first to make public in the Life of
Wedgwood), preserved in the Museum at Hanley, is as follows:--

   “This Indenture, made the Eleventh day of November, in the
   Seventeenth year of the Reign of our Soveraign Lord, George the
   Second, by the grace of God, King of great Brittain, and so
   forth, and in the year of our Lord one Thousand Seven Hundred
   forty and four, Between Josiah Wedgwood, son of Mary Wedgwood,
   of the Churchyard, in the County of Stafford, of the one part,
   and Thomas Wedgwood, of the Churchyard, in the County of
   Stafford, Potter, of the other part, Wittnesseth that the said
   Josiah Wedgwood, of his own free Will and Consent to, and with
   the Consent and Direction of his said Mother, Hath put and doth
   hereby Bind himselfe Apprentice unto the said Thomas Wedgwood,
   to Learn his Art, Mistery, Occupation, or Imployment of Throwing
   and Handleing, which he the said Thomas Wedgwood now useth, and
   with him as an Apprentice to Dwell, Continue, and Serve from the
   day of the Date hereof, unto the full end and term of five years
   from thence next Ensuing, and fully to be Compleat and Ended;
   During which said Term, the said Apprentice his said Master
   well and faithfully shall serve, his secrits keep, his Lawfull
   Commands Every were gladly do; Hurt to his said Master he shall
   not do, nor willfully suffer to be done by others, but the same
   to his Power shall let, or forthwith give notice thereof to his
   said Master; the goods of his said Master he shall not imbezil
   or waste, nor them Lend, without his Consent, to any; at Cards,
   Dice, or any other unlawfull Games he shall not Play; Taverns
   or Ale Houses he shall not haunt or frequent; Fornication he
   shall not Commit, Matrimony he shall not Contract; from the
   Service of his said Master he shall not at any time depart
   or absent himselfe without his said Master’s Leave: but in
   all things as a good and faithful Apprentice Shall and Will
   Demean and behave himselfe towards his said Master and all his,
   During the said Term, and the Said Master his Apprentice the
   said Art of Throwing and Handleing which he now useth, with
   all things thereunto, shall and will Teach and Instruct, or
   Cause to be well and Sufficiently Taught and Instructed after
   the best way and manner he can, and shall and will also find
   and allow unto the Said Apprentice Meat, Drink, Washing and
   Lodging, and Apparell of all kinds, both Linen and Woolen, and
   all other Necessaries, both in Sickness and in Health, meet and
   Convenient for such an Apprentice During the Term aforesaid, and
   for the true performance of all and Every the said Covenants
   and Agreements either of the Said Parties Bindeth himselfe
   unto Each other by these presents, in Witness wereof they have
   Interchangeably Set their hands and Seals the Day and year
   before mentioned.

    JOSIAH WEDGWOOD.
    MARY WEDGWOOD.
    THOS. WEDGWOOD.”

    Sealed and Delivered }
    in the Presence of   }
    SAMUEL ASTBURY.
    ABNER WEDGWOOD.

  [Illustration: Fig. 524.--Fac-simile of Signatures to Wedgwood’s
  Indentures.]

Facsimiles of the autograph signatures of Josiah Wedgwood; of his
mother, Mary Wedgwood; his brother, Thomas, to whom he was bound; his
uncle, Samuel Astbury (husband to Elizabeth Wedgwood, his father’s
sister); and his brother or uncle, Abner Wedgwood, are given in Fig.
524. The indenture is endorsed “Josiah Wedgwood to Thos. Wedgwood.
Indenture for 5 years. November 11th, 1744.” Of the Churchyard Works a
view is given on page 244.

In 1749 Josiah Wedgwood’s apprenticeship expired, but he probably
remained for some time in the employ of his brother. He next went
to Stoke, where he lodged with a mercer, Mr. Daniel Mayer, and
commenced making imitation agate and other knife-handles, and in 1752
entered into partnership with John Harrison for the manufacture of
the same kind of goods (see page 232). Two years later both Wedgwood
and Harrison entered into partnership for a term of five years with
Thomas Whieldon, at Fenton Low, as already spoken of under the head
of those works (which see). At the expiration of the five years,
namely, in 1759, Josiah Wedgwood returned to Burslem and commenced
business on his own account; first, there is reason to believe, at the
“Churchyard” Works, and next at the Ivy “House” (Fig. 368), which he
rented from his relatives of the “Big House.” Next, he entered upon
another manufactory, the “Bell Bank,” or “Bell Works” (Fig. 367), as it
became called, and thus carried on their pot-works at the same time.
Here he produced his famous “Queen’s ware,” which earned for him the
appointment of “Queen’s potter,” which was thus brought about.

In 1762, on the occasion of the accouchement of Queen Charlotte,
Wedgwood, having by that time perfected the body and glaze of his fine
cream-coloured ware, presented to her Majesty a caudle and breakfast
service of his manufacture, which was graciously received. This
service, which was of course made of the finest and best cream-coloured
quality which could be produced, was painted in the highest style of
the day by the first artists of the works, Thomas Daniell and Daniel
Steele. The ground of this service, which was prepared with all the
skill the art would then admit of, was yellow, with raised sprigs of
jessamine and other flowers, coloured after nature. The Queen received
this tribute of an infant art, and was so pleased with it that she at
once expressed a wish to have a complete table service of the same
material. Wedgwood submitted patterns for the several pieces, “which
were approved, with the exception of the plate, which was the common
barleycorn pattern, then making by all the salt-glaze manufacturers.
Her Majesty objected to the roughness--the ‘barleycorn-work’ as it is
called--and therefore this part was made plain; on the edge was left
only the bands, marking the compartments; and being approved by her
Majesty, the pattern was called ‘Queen’s pattern.’” The ware was at
once named by Wedgwood “Queen’s ware,” and he received the Queen’s
commands to call himself “Potter to Her Majesty.” On the service being
completed the King gave Wedgwood his immediate patronage by ordering
a similar service for himself, but without the bands or ribs. This
alteration in pattern was “effected to the entire satisfaction of his
Majesty,” and some little alterations being made in the forms of some
of the other pieces, it was called the “Royal pattern.” The patronage
thus given was of incalculable benefit to Wedgwood, to the district
around him, and indeed to the whole kingdom, for it opened up a source
of wealth to thousands of people, and was the means of extending
commerce to a marvellous extent. Orders for the new kind of ware flowed
in upon him in a regular and constantly increasing stream, and at
prices which were then considered liberal or even high. It is recorded
that at this period he received at the rate of fifteen shillings per
dozen for table plates, and for other pieces a proportionate price. The
tide of fortune which thus had set in upon him was immensely increased
by his subsequent inventions, and ultimately swept him from his small
manufactories at Burslem to the colony he established a few miles off
at Etruria. The other most usual form of plate in his Queen’s ware was
the “Bath” or “Trencher,” from its resemblance to the wooden platter
or trencher, and this was succeeded by the concave rim, and other
varieties. Wedgwood did not patent his inventions and improvements,
and thus every manufacturer was stimulated, and a host of Queen’s or
cream-ware makers soon, sprang up. When he “discovered the art of
making Queen’s ware,” wrote Wedgwood himself, “which employs ten times
more people than all the china works in the kingdom, he did not ask
for a patent for this important discovery. A patent would greatly have
limited its public utility. Instead of _one hundred_ manufactories
of Queen’s ware there would have been _one_; and instead of an
exportation to all quarters of the world, a few pretty things would
have been made for the amusement of the people of fashion in England.”
Some of his Queen’s ware Wedgwood had decorated with transfer printing
by Sadler and Green of Liverpool, as already noted under that head.
This is alluded to in the “Burslem Dialogue:”--

   “_L._--Oi’d summat t’ doo t’ get dahn t’ L’rpool wi’ eawr caart,
   at th’ teyme as oi fust tayd Mester ‘Siah Wedgut’s wheit ware
   for t’ be printed theer. Yu known as hâe ther wur noo black
   printin’ on ware dun i’ Boslem i’ thoos deys.

   “_T._--Oi remember ’t varry weel. Oi s’pose as ’Siah wur abaht
   th’ same age as thiseln, Rafy, wur he no’?

   “_L._--Ya, oi rek’n he wur tew year yunker til me.

   “_T._--When he started i’ bizness fust, he made spewnes, knife
   hondles, an’ smaw crocks, at th’ Ivy hahs, close to where we’re
   nah sittin’.

   “_L._--Aye, oi weel remember th’ toyme; an’ arter that he
   flitted to th’ Bell Workhus, wheer he put up th’ bell-coney for
   t’ ring th’ men to ther work isted o’ blowin’ em together wi’ a
   hurn. ’Twur a pity he e’er left Boslum, for he wur th’ cob o’
   th’ Wedguts.”

  [Illustration: Figs. 525 and 526.--Flaxman’s Medallions of
  Josiah Wedgwood and his Wife.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 527 to 533.--Wedgwood’s Basaltes or
  Egyptian Black Ware.]

On the 25th of January, 1764, Josiah Wedgwood married, at Astbury, in
Cheshire, his distant relative--his seventh cousin--Sarah Wedgwood,
daughter, and eventually heiress, of Richard Wedgwood, Esq., of
Smallwood, in that county, and also heiress to her brother John. By
this marriage Josiah Wedgwood ultimately became possessed of a fortune
of some twenty thousand pounds. After his marriage he still resided at
the “Ivy House;” and, having failed in his proposal to purchase the
“Big House” when his relatives retired from business, he set about the
founding of an entirely new manufactory. His “Big House” relations were
the brothers Thomas and John Wedgwood, sons of Aaron Wedgwood, by his
wife Mary Hollins. This Aaron was son of Aaron, sixth son of Gilbert,
from whom Josiah and the various Burslem branches of the family were
descended, and he and his wife, Mary Hollins, were both buried in
the same grave on the same day, 24th of April, 1743. He, as well as
his son and his grandsons, Thomas and John, were lead-glaze potters.
About 1740, it is said, these two “commenced the manufacture of white
stoneware upon their own account; but although very industrious and
ingenious workmen (one of them being well skilled in burning or firing
the ware, and the other an excellent thrower), they were unsuccessful
for a long time, and had actually determined to abandon any further
attempt to make the white stoneware, when an accidental circumstance
encouraged them to proceed. The water with which they prepared the
clay, it seems, became highly saturated with salt, owing to the shard
ruck or rubbish from their ovens being placed immediately above their
water pool, and which rubbish contained much salt. The rain passing
through the shard ruck, dissolved the salt, and carried it into the
pool, whence it got into the body of the ware, and, in conjunction with
the flint and clay, together with the lime which generally adheres
to flint stones, formed a fusible body that arrived at a state of
vitrification with a lower degree of heat than was requisite to prepare
this body for the salt glaze. This discovery induced them to make
other and more extended trials, and in these they succeeded beyond
expectation. The Wedgwoods followed up their success with unremitting
diligence; and shortly afterwards built a new and commodious
manufactory, where they had a supply of good water. This was near the
Windmill, invented and erected by the celebrated Brindley for reducing
flint-stones to a fine powder by grinding them in water, and thereby
preventing the pernicious effects upon the health of the men employed
in preparing the flint according to the old method, by pounding it by
hand in a dry state in a mortar. The fine dust of the flint getting
into the lungs produced coughs and consumptions, which frequently
proved fatal. This building, censured at the time as having been upon
too extensive a scale, was the first earthenware manufactory in the
Potteries _not covered with thatch_. In 1750 they erected an
excellent and substantial dwelling-house adjoining their manufactory,
which so far exceeded the other houses in the Potteries in point of
size and elegance, that it then was, and now is, distinguished by the
appellation of the ‘Big House;’ and in the year 1763 these gentlemen
retired from business in the possession of an ample fortune, the just
and honourable reward of their industry and integrity.”

Having taken into partnership his relative, Thomas Wedgwood, “who had
been some years a faithful and industrious foreman in the manufactory,”
in the Queen’s ware department, Wedgwood became more at liberty to
prosecute his experiments. This Thomas married Elizabeth Taylor, of
the Hill, Burslem, by whom he had issue Ralph (the head of the firm
of “Wedgwood & Co.,” of the Hill Works, afterwards of Ferrybridge;
inventor of the “Penna-polygraph,” the “Manifold Writer,” &c.; author
of the “Book of Remembrance,” developer of his father’s invention of
the Electric Telegraph, the “Fulguri-polygraph” as he called it; and
a man of undoubted scientific attainments); John Taylor Wedgwood,
the eminent line-engraver; Samuel; Thomas; Aaron; and Abner. Thomas
Wedgwood, the partner of Josiah, a man of great acquirements, of high
scientific attainments, and of intense business qualifications, died in
1788.

  [Illustration: Agate and Porphyry Wares.

  Queen’s Ware made at the Bell Works.

  Queen’s Ware Centre.

  Crabstock Red-ware Teapot.

  Figs. 534 to 539.--Wedgwood’s Productions.]

In 1766 Wedgwood produced his “basaltes” of “Egyptian,” fine black
ware, which became so famous, and this was followed by his “Jasper,”
“White-stone,” “Cane-coloured,” “Mortar,” and other wares. His various
wares were thus described by himself:--

   “1. A _terra-cotta_; resembling porphyry, granite, Egyptian,
   pebble, and other beautiful stones of the silicious or
   crystalline order.

   “2. _Basaltes_ or black ware; a black porcelain biscuit of
   nearly the same properties with the natural stone; striking fire
   with steel, receiving a high polish, serving as a touchstone for
   metals, resisting all the acids, and bearing without injury a
   strong fire: stronger, indeed, than the basaltes itself.

   “3. _White porcelain biscuit_, of a smooth, wax-like surface, of
   the same properties with the preceding, except in what depends
   upon colour.

   “4. _Jasper_; a white porcelain biscuit of exquisite beauty and
   delicacy, possessing the general properties of the basaltes,
   together with the singular one of receiving through its whole
   substance, from the admixture of metallic calces with the other
   materials, the same colours which those calces communicate to
   glass or enamels in fusion; a property which no other porcelain
   or earthenware body of ancient or modern composition has been
   found to possess. This renders it peculiarly fit for making
   cameos, portraits, and all subjects in bas-relief, as the ground
   may be of any particular colour, while the raised figures are of
   a pure white.

   “5. _Bamboo_, or cane-coloured biscuit porcelain, of the same
   nature as No. 3.

   “6. A _porcelain biscuit_, remarkable for great hardness,
   little inferior to that of agate. This property, together with
   its resistance to the strongest acids and corrosives, and its
   impenetrability by every known liquid, adapts it for mortars and
   many different kinds of chemical vessels.

   “These six distinct species, with the Queen’s ware already
   mentioned, expanded by the industry and ingenuity of the
   different manufacturers into an infinity of forms for ornament
   and use, variously painted and embellished, constitute nearly
   the whole of the present fine English earthenwares and porcelain
   which are now become the source of a very extensive trade, and
   which, considered as an object of national art, industry, and
   commerce, may be ranked amongst the most important manufactures
   of the kingdom.”

  [Illustration: Fig. 540.--Etruria Works.]

In 1766 Josiah Wedgwood purchased the Ridge House Estate, in the
township of Shelton, which he afterwards named “Etruria.” On this
estate, in the succeeding year, he commenced the building of what
he called the “Black Works,” _i.e._ the works intended for the
production of his basaltes or black ware, and soon afterwards (in
1768) took into partnership, in the ornamental department, Mr. Thomas
Bentley, of the firm of Bentley & Boardman of Liverpool, who were his
agents in that town.

  [Illustration: Figs. 541 and 542.--Medallion and Autograph of
  Thomas Bentley.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 543 and 544.--First Vases made at Etruria.]

Thomas Bentley, who was the son of Thomas Bentley of Scropton, in
Derbyshire, was born there on the 1st of January, 1730, and was
brought up at Manchester. From thence he removed to Liverpool,
where, in conjunction with Mr. Boardman, he commenced business as
Manchester warehouseman, they living together in Paradise Street.[53]
On joining Wedgwood, Thomas Bentley of course left Liverpool, and
devoted himself to the business in London. In 1769 the Etruria
works were opened, and on the 13th of June in that year its first
productions were thrown--Thomas Bentley turning the wheel, while the
“great” Josiah Wedgwood himself “threw” the pieces. These were three
vases of Etruscan form, and they afterwards passed through all the
processes of the potter’s art, and were painted in Etruscan style, with
suitable inscriptions. These historical and priceless vases are in the
possession of Mr. Francis Wedgwood, of Barlaston. Two of these are
shown above (Figs. 543, 544), engraved from careful drawings made by
myself from the vases at Barlaston. They bear the words

                          JUNE XIII MDCCLXIX
                  One of the first Day’s Productions
                                  at
                       Etruria in Staffordshire
                                  by
                         Wedgwood and Bentley
                       Artes Etruriæ renascunter

  [Illustration: Figs. 545 and 546.--Flaxman’s Bas-reliefs in
  Jasper Ware.]

Each of these vases is labelled in Wedgwood’s own handwriting, “Part of
Plate 129, vol. i., of Hamilton’s Antiq. Hercules and his Companions
in the Garden of the Hesperides,” showing both the subject and where
obtained. In 1770 Wedgwood and Bentley established works at Chelsea
for the decoration of these “encaustic vases” and for other purposes.
Of the names of some of the painters at that time (October, 1770)
employed in this Chelsea establishment I am enabled to give evidence in
the following document in my own possession:--

                                        {  On         On
    _Cash paid at Chelsea for Wages._   {J. W.’s   W. & B.’s
                                        { Acct.      Acct.
     1770.                               £ _s._ _d._    £ _s._ _d._
    Oct. 6.  John Lawrence, 6 days.      0  5    3      0  5    3
             Timothy Roberts, 6 days.                   0 12    0
      „  5.  James Bakewell, 6 days.     0 16    0
             Thos. Blomeley’s Bill.      1  0    5
             Thos. Hutchings, 6 days.                   1  6    0
             William Roberts, 4 days.    0  4    4
             Nathl. Cooper, 6 days.      0 16    0
             William Shuter’s Bill.                     0  8    0
             Thomas Simcock, 6 days.     0 16    0
             Ralph Willcocks, 6 days.
             Mrs. ditto 6 days.
             John Winstanley, 6 days.    0 13    0
      „ 6.   Thomas Barrett, 5 days.     0  7    0
             Thomas Green, 6 days.
             Miss Edwards, 6 days.
             Miss Parkes, 6 days.
             Mr. Rhodes.
             Ditto for Joe.
             Ditto for Will.
             Ditto for Unwin.

The partnership of Wedgwood and Bentley had reference only to the
_ornamented_, not to the _useful_ ware; and in this account, although
the workmen were employed on both branches, the wages were divided
into headings:--“On J. W.’s Acct.” (distinguished as Josiah Wedgwood’s
account), and “On W. & B.’s Acct.” (Wedgwood and Bentley’s account).
Thus, John Lawrence, for the week ending October 6th, is paid for six
days’ Work, at 1_s._ 9_d._ a day, of which 5_s._ 3_d._ is charged to
“J. W.,” and the other 5_s._ 3_d._ to “W. & B.” The Chelsea painting
establishment continued for some time, and down nearly to the close of
last century painting and enamelling were done for the firm in London.

In 1772 Bentley (who, in 1754, had married Hannah Oates of Sheffield,
who did not live long) married, at All Saints’ Church, Derby, his
second wife, Mary Stamford, of that town. In the year following, the
partners issued their first catalogue of goods, which was entitled--

   “A Catalogue of Cameos, Intaglios, Medals, and Bas-reliefs,
   with a general account of Vases and other ornaments after the
   antique; made by Wedgwood and Bentley, and sold at their rooms
   in Great Newport Street, London.

    “‘Quoniam et sic gentes nobilitantur.’

        PLIN. lib. xxxv., _De Vasis fictilibus_.

   “London: printed in the year MDCCLXXIII., and sold by Cadel, in
   the Strand; Robson, New Bond Street; and Parker, printseller,
   Cornhill.”

It is of much smaller size than the later editions, and contains sixty
pages, inclusive of introduction, &c. The following quotation, from the
introductory portion, will enable collectors to arrive at a correct
idea of the dates of the production of the various wares:--

   “The proprietors of this manufactory have been encouraged by the
   generous attention of the nobility and connoisseurs to their
   first essays to give it all the extent and improvement they were
   able, and with constant application and great expense they have
   now produced a considerable variety of ornaments in different
   kinds, the merit of which they humbly submit to the judgment of
   those who are best skilled in these subjects.

   “The variety of new articles which many of their respectable
   friends have not seen, and multitudes of persons of curiosity
   and taste in the works of Art have never heard of, render some
   account or catalogue of them desirable, and even necessary: but
   many of the articles, and especially the vases, being of such a
   nature as not to admit of satisfactory and clear descriptions,
   several parts of this catalogue can only give a slight and
   general enumeration of the classes, without descending to
   particulars.

   “We shall, however, hope to make the general enumeration
   sufficiently intelligible, and descend to particulars where the
   nature of the subjects admits of it.

   “To give an idea of the _nature_ and _variety_ of the
   productions of our ornamental works, it will be necessary to
   point out and describe the various _compositions_ of which the
   forms, &c., are made, and to distinguish and arrange the several
   productions in suitable _classes_.

   “The _compositions_, or bodies, of which the ornamental pieces
   are made, may be divided into the following branches:--

   “I. A composition of _terra cotta_, resembling porphyry, lapis
   lazuli, jasper, and other beautiful stones, of the vitrescent or
   crystalline class.

   “II. A fine _black porcelain_, having nearly the same properties
   as the _basaltes_, resisting the attacks of acids, being a
   touchstone to copper, silver, and gold, and equal in hardness to
   agate or porphyry.

   “III. A fine white biscuit ware, or _terra cotta_, polished and
   unpolished.”

  [Illustration: Fig. 547.--Medallion, White on Black.]

Thus, in 1773, it is evident there were only three kinds of ware made
by Wedgwood, viz., “terra cotta resembling porphyry, lapis lazuli,
jasper, and other beautiful stones, of the vitrescent or crystalline
class,” such as the imitation porphyry, marble, and other vases,
were composed of; the “fine black porcelain, or _basaltes_,” so
largely used for vases, figures, medallions, and other ornamental
purposes, as well as for tea-pots, &c.; and the “white biscuit ware,
or terra cotta,” used both in combination with other materials in
the production of vases, medallions, and other decorative pieces, and
separately for the manufacture of stands and other ornamental goods.
The combination of these two latter bodies will be called to mind
by collectors, perhaps, more easily with regard to medallions than
otherwise. In these the oval of the plaque was frequently made of the
black ware, and the bust of the white terra cotta (Fig. 580).

In the next year (1774) a fourth variety was added, thus described in
the catalogue of that date:--

   “IV. A fine white _terra cotta_, of great beauty and
   delicacy, proper for cameos, portraits, and bas-reliefs.”

  [Illustration: Fig. 548.--Jasper Plaque.]

This was the first appearance of what afterwards became the most
beautiful of all Wedgwood’s productions--the “Jasper ware.” It will be
perceived that at this date (1774) it was simply spoken of as a “fine
white terra-cotta,” and that it remained for later years to produce it
with its splendid blue and other coloured grounds, with raised white
figures and ornaments. In 1787 this variety, which then had attained
its highest perfection, is described at greater length as--

   “IV. JASPER--a white porcelain _bisqué_ of exquisite beauty and
   delicacy, possessing the general properties of the basaltes,
   together with that of receiving colours through its whole
   substance, in a manner which no other _body_, ancient or modern,
   has been known to do. This renders it peculiarly fit for cameos,
   portraits, and all subjects in bas-relief, as the group may be
   made of any colour throughout, without paint or enamel, and the
   raised figures of a pure white.”

  [Illustration: Figs. 549 to 562.--Wedgwood’s Jasper Ware.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 563.--“Peace preventing Mars from bursting
  the door of Janus’s Temple.”]

  [Illustration: Fig. 564.--“Mercury uniting the hands of England
  and France.”

  Bas-reliefs in Jasper by Flaxman; charged in his bills.]

Of the productions in this ware Wedgwood wrote:--“As these are my
latest, I hope they will be found to be my most approved, works. Verbal
descriptions could give but an imperfect idea of the delicacy of the
materials, the execution of the artist, or the general effect, and I
must therefore beg leave to refer those who wish for information
in these respects to a view of the articles themselves.„ In 1775 a
reissue of the English catalogue, consequent on the change of the
London warehouse from Great Newport Street to Greek Street, Soho, made
its appearance. At the end is an addition of six pages, containing an
engraving and explanation of Wedgwood’s newly-invented inkstands and
eye-cups.

  [Illustration: Fig. 565.--Jasper Déjuner.]

In 1775, on the occasion of Richard Champion applying to Parliament for
an extension of the term of patent-right in Cookworthy’s invention of
porcelain (as detailed in my first volume), “Josiah Wedgwood, in behalf
of himself and the manufacturers of earthenware in Staffordshire,”
gave the scheme his most determined, but happily not successful,
opposition. The printed papers connected with this matter are of the
highest interest and importance, but having already been printed _in
extenso_ in my “Life of Wedgwood,” I refrain from again introducing
them. It is also needless to recapitulate the particulars regarding
numerous editions, English and foreign, of the catalogue.

In 1780 (November 26th) Thomas Bentley died at his residence at Turnham
Green, London, and was buried at Chiswick on the 2nd of December,
where a tablet is erected to his memory. About this time, and probably
previously as well as later, Flaxman the sculptor was much employed by
Wedgwood, and his designs and models gave a tone and a character to
the productions which raised them to an immeasurable height. I was so
fortunate as to be able to print, for the first time, in 1864, some of
the original bills for work done by Flaxman for Wedgwood, in which many
well-known portrait groups, &c., are named. From these I give a few
items for the purpose of reference:--

                                                          £  _s._ _ d._
   “A portrait of Mr. Herschell                           2   2     0
    A     „       Dr. Buchan                              2   2     0
    A portrait of C. Jenkinson,                           2   2     0
    A      „      Govr. Hastings   Esq.                   3   3     0
    Mr. and Mrs. Meerman’s portraits                      5   5     0
    Moulding a bust of Mr. and Mrs. Siddons               1  11     6
    A model in wax of Capt. Cook                          2   2     0
    A      „    „     Dr. Johnson                         2   2     0
    A figure of a Fool for Chess                          1   5     0
    A drawing of Chess Men                                6   6     0
    A model of the King of Sweden                         2   2     0
    A model of Peace preventing Mars from bursting
      the Door of Janus’s Temple                         15  15     0
    A bas-relief in wax of Veturia and Volumnia
      entreating Coriolanus                               9   9     0
    A model of Mercury uniting the hands of England
      and France                                         13  13    0
    A bas-relief of Hercules in the Hesperian Garden     23   0    0
    A model of the Queen of Portugal                      3   3    0
    A bas-relief of Boys in wax                          11   0    6”

and so on. Besides these he charges for drawings of crests and coats of
arms; drawing bas-relief vases, &c., at a guinea a day; outlines for
lamp and stand; drawings of chimney-pieces; patterns for borders for
plates, &c. Many of Flaxman’s originals are still in Messrs. Wedgwood’s
hands, and the moulds are still used by them for their lovely
productions; others, notably a series of exquisite models in wax, are
in the possession of Sir D. C. Marjoribanks. Of some of those named I
give engravings.

In 1782 Wedgwood was elected F.R.S., and communicated to that learned
body his invention of “a thermometer for measuring the higher degrees
of heat, from a red-heat up to the strongest that vessels made of clay
can support;” in the following year his observations on “Derbyshire
Black Wadd;” and afterwards other observations on thermometers, &c.
In 1785 he invented his famous “Jasper Dip,” which has continued in
use ever since. In that year he wrote “The new jasper, white within,
will be the only sort made in future; but as the workmanship is
nearly double, the price must be raised. I think it must be about 20
per cent. Nov. 21, 1787.” Thus, till 1785, the “jasper” body was the
same throughout; from Nov., 1785 to 1858, it was “dipped,” remaining
white inside; and in the latter year the “solid jasper” body was
re-introduced, and continues to some extent to be made.

  [Illustration:

    MRS. MEERMAN.        MRS. SIDDONS.
    KING OF SWEDEN.      THE QUEEN OF PORTUGAL.

    MR. MEERMAN.    HERSCHELL.
    DR. BUCHAN.     C. JENKINSON.

  Figs. 566 to 573.--Wedgwood Medallion Wares.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 574.--Group from the Portland Vase.]

In 1786 the then recently deceased Duchess of Portland’s magnificent
collection of antiquities and objects of _virtu_ were sold by auction,
and among other articles of matchless interest was the Barberini or
Portland Vase. This vase Wedgwood determined to possess, and having bid
up to about a thousand pounds against the Duke of Portland, his grace,
on learning why it was wanted, very kindly offered, if he would forego
bidding and permit him to purchase, he would place it in Wedgwood’s
hands to copy as he thought proper. It was therefore knocked down to
the Duke for £1,029, and handed to Wedgwood by him; this “inestimable
jewel,” as he called it, remained in his hands more than twelve months.
Of this vase Wedgwood produced fifty copies, which were subscribed for
at fifty guineas each, but it is said that even this sum, £2,500, fell
far short of the outlay incurred in making them. One of the first fifty
is in the possession of Mr. Francis Wedgwood (where it will remain, it
is hoped, with the first-thrown vases, as heirlooms); another is in
the possession of the Duke of Sutherland, at Trentham; a third belongs
to Sir D. C. Marjoribanks; a fourth is in the Mayer Museum; and others
are at different collections. The body used for this vase was black
jasper, and the figures, in their proper tone, were worked up and cut
by the seal and gem engraver to the utmost possible degree of sharpness
and finish. The original moulds are still in existence, and from them
Messrs. Wedgwood still produce their famed Portland vases, both with a
black, and with deep, or light, blue ground.[54]

In 1786 Wedgwood was elected a Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries,
and in the following year the sixth edition of his Catalogue contained
for the first time the addition of the “Bamboo” and “Mortar” bodies:--

   “V.--_Bamboo_, or cane-coloured bisqué porcelain, of the same
   nature as No. 3.

   “VI.--A porcelain bisqué of extreme _hardness_, little inferior
   to that of agate. This property, together with its resistance to
   the strongest acids and corrosives, and its impenetrability by
   every known species of liquids, adapts it happily for mortars
   and different kinds of chemical vessels.”

  [Illustration: Fig. 575.]

In 1788 Thomas Wedgwood, Josiah Wedgwood’s partner in the “useful
ware,” died. In the following year the medallion (Fig. 575) supposed
to be made of clay brought from New South Wales, was executed. In 1790
the fifty copies of the Portland vase were issued, and the same year
Wedgwood published his “Dissertation” upon it. The same year he took
into partnership his three sons, John, Josiah, and Thomas Wedgwood, and
his nephew, Thomas Byerley (the son of his sister, Margaret Wedgwood,
by her husband, who was a descendant of the Byerleys, of Byerley Hall,
in Yorkshire), the style of the firm being “Josiah Wedgwood, Sons, &
Byerley.” In 1793 Mr. John Wedgwood retired from the concern, and the
style was then altered to “Josiah Wedgwood, Son, & Byerley.”

In the following year, 1794, Josiah Wedgwood was seized with his last
illness, and on the 3rd of January, 1795, he died, and was, on the 6th,
buried in the churchyard at Stoke-upon-Trent (“Burials in 1795, Jany.
6th, Josiah Wedgwood, of Etruria”), where his tomb still remains, and
a tablet erected to his memory in the chancel (Fig. 588). It bears a
remarkably fine bust of Wedgwood, by Flaxman, an ewer and a Portland
vase, and the following inscription:

                        Sacred to the Memory of
                   JOSIAH WEDGWOOD, F.R.S. AND S.A.,
                      Of Etruria, in this County,
             Born in August, 1730, died January 3rd, 1795,
Who converted a rude and inconsiderable manufacture into an elegant art
                   And an important part of national
                               Commerce.
    By these services to his country he acquired an ample fortune,
             Which he blamelessly and reasonably enjoyed,
  And generously dispensed for the reward of merit and the relief of
                              misfortune.
   His mind was inventive and original, yet perfectly sober and well
                              regulated;
    His character was decisive and commanding, without rashness or
                              arrogance;
          His probity was inflexible, his kindness unwearied;
 His manners simple and dignified, and the cheerfulness of his temper
                       was the natural reward of
               The activity of his pure and useful life.
             He was most loved by those who knew him best,
 And he has left indelible impressions of affection and veneration on
                             the minds of
       His family, who have erected this monument to his memory.

  [Illustration: Figs. 576 to 580.--Wedgwood’s Wares.]

  [Illustration: [SEE INSCRIPTION PAGE 369.]

  Fig. 581.--Monument to Josiah Wedgwood in Stoke-upon-Trent Church.]

Josiah Wedgwood, whose wife survived him, had a family of children.
These were, Susannah, baptized at Burslem, on the 2nd of January, 1765,
married Dr. Robert Darwin, of Shrewsbury, son of the celebrated Dr.
Erasmus Darwin, of Derby (and half-brother to Sir Francis Darwin, M.D.,
of Breadsall Priory, and Sydnope, Darley Dale,) by his first wife, Mary
Howard, of Lichfield, and was the mother, along with other sons and
daughters, of Charles Darwin, the naturalist, author of the “Origin of
Species,” &c. John, baptized at Burslem, April 2nd, 1766, resided at
Seabridge, and married Louisa Jane, daughter of Mr. Allen, of Criselly,
Pembrokeshire, and by her had four sons and three daughters (viz., the
Rev. John Allen Wedgwood; Lieut.-Col. Thomas Josiah Wedgwood, who
married Anne Maria, daughter of Admiral Sir C. Tyler; Charles, who died
without issue; the Rev. Robert Wedgwood, who married Frances, daughter
of the Rev. Offley Crewe; Sarah Elizabeth; Caroline Louisa Jane; and
Jessie, who married her cousin, Henry Allen Wedgwood). Richard, born
in 1767, and died in 1782. Josiah, one of the founders of the Royal
Horticultural Society, first member of parliament for the borough
of Stoke-upon-Trent, of Maer Hall, who married Elizabeth Allen, of
Criselly, Pembrokeshire, and by her had four sons and five daughters,
viz., Josiah (the third of that name), who married his cousin, Caroline
Elizabeth, daughter of Dr. Darwin, of Shrewsbury, and had issue Henry
Allen Wedgwood, barrister-at-law, who married his cousin Jessie,
daughter of John Wedgwood, of Seabridge; Francis Wedgwood, of Etruria
and Barlaston, the late head of the Etruria firm, who married Frances,
daughter of the Rev. J. P. Mosley, of Rolleston Rectory, and has issue
three sons, Godfrey, Clement, and Lawrence, the present members of the
firm, and four daughters; Hensleigh, barrister-at-law, of London, who
married Elizabeth, daughter of the Right Hon. Sir James Mackintosh, the
historian, and has issue Sarah Elizabeth; Mary, who died unmarried;
Charlotte, married to the Rev. C. Langton, of Hartfield; Frances, who
died unmarried; and Emma, who married her cousin, Charles Darwin,
F.R.S., author of the “Origin of Species,” &c. Thomas, who died without
issue; and Catherine, Sarah, and Mary Anne.

  [Illustration: Fig. 582.--Medallion of Thomas Byerley.]

For a time after Josiah Wedgwood’s death, the management of the
business devolved mainly on Mr. Byerley, whose experience, and skill
were of great value. In 1800 the partners were, however, the brothers
Josiah and John Wedgwood, and Thomas Byerley, which arrangement
continued until the death of the latter in 1810. Thomas Wedgwood, who
suffered constant ill-health, took no part in the management of the
business, and died in 1805, at Gunville, Dorsetshire. He was a man of
considerable scientific attainments. During his father’s lifetime he
prosecuted his studies with his aid and that of Alexander Chisholm,
and made such progress in his researches into the properties of light,
&c., that in 1792 he communicated to the Royal Society an account of
his “Experiments and Observations on the Production of Light from
different bodies by Heat and by Attraction.” His continued experiments
and researches resulted in the discovery of the process of photography,
and in 1802, in conjunction with Sir Humphrey Davy, he made those
discoveries known by a paper printed in the “Journal of the Royal
Institution of Great Britain,” under the title of “An Account of a
Method of Copying Paintings upon Glass, and of making Profiles by
the Agency of Light upon Nitrate of Silver; with observations by H.
Davy.” This is the first recorded attempt at fixing the images of the
camera-obscura (which Wedgwood appears to have used from a youth) by
the chemical influence of light.

On the death of Mr. Byerley, the business was carried on by the second
Josiah Wedgwood alone, until Martinmas, 1823, when he took his eldest
son Josiah (the third of that name) into partnership, the firm being
carried on under the style of “Josiah Wedgwood & Son.” Four years
afterwards, at Martinmas, 1827, another son, Francis, having been taken
into partnership, the style was altered to that of “Josiah Wedgwood &
Sons.”

In November, 1841, Josiah Wedgwood, senior, of Maer Hall, retired from
the business, and it was carried on by his sons until the following
April, when Josiah Wedgwood, junior, also retired. The style of the
firm, however, continued to be, as it is to the present day, “Josiah
Wedgwood & Sons.”

The manufacture of china, which had never been attempted by the first
Josiah, was commenced at Etruria about 1808 or 1809, in the time of
Mr. Byerley, who considered that it would be an advantageous addition
to the works; but was only carried on for probably nine or ten years,
and then finally discontinued. The china was of extremely good quality,
both in texture of body, in colour, in glaze, and in decoration. It was
not made to any great extent, and is now very scarce. In the Museum
of Practical Geology, the Mayer Museum, and other collections, are
excellent and characteristic specimens. The mark on the china is the
simple name

                               WEDGWOOD,

in small capital letters, printed on the bottom in red or blue.

“Stone china” was also at one time, to some little extent, made at
Etruria, examples of which are now rare. It ceased to be made about the
year 1825.

In 1815, on the 15th of January, Mrs. Wedgwood, widow of the great
Josiah, died at Parkfield, in the eighty-first year of her age; she was
buried at Stoke-upon-Trent, near her husband, where a Gothic memorial
tablet bears the following inscription:

                        Sacred to the memory of
                                 SARAH
                       Widow of JOSIAH WEDGWOOD,
                              of Etruria.
                      Born August the 18th, 1734.
                     Died January the 15th, 1815.

The productions of the firm at this time--and indeed through each
successive change in the proprietary down to the present time--were,
as they had been in the time of the first Josiah, divided between the
“useful” and the “ornamented.” The “useful” consisting of services of
every kind in fine earthenware, and in all the varieties of bodies
hitherto introduced, to which additional patterns were constantly
added; and the “ornamented” comprising all the immense variety of
exquisite articles which had been made by the great founder of the
works, with additional vases, medallions, and other pieces.

In 1843, on the 23rd of August, Mr. John Boyle became a partner in the
firm; but his connection was only of short duration, and sixteen months
afterwards, on the 4th of January, 1845, he died.

On the 2nd of March, 1846, Mr. Robert Brown, of Cliff Ville, became
a partner with the Messrs. Wedgwood; but, dying on the 26th of May,
1859, Mr. Francis Wedgwood was again left sole proprietor of the works.
In November of the same year he was joined in partnership by his son,
Mr. Godfrey Wedgwood, in 1863 by his second son, Mr. Clement Wedgwood,
and in 1868 by his third son, Mr. Lawrence Wedgwood, and (Mr. Francis
Wedgwood having retired in 1870) the works are still carried on by them
under the old style of “Josiah Wedgwood & Sons.”

  [Illustration: Figs. 583 to 588.--Perseus and Andromeda Vase by
  Lessore; Vase by Lessore; Jasper Beads; and three Vases.]

The MARKS used by the Wedgwoods have been in all cases, except
during the partnership of Thomas Bentley, on that particular branch
of the manufacture in which he had an interest, the simple name of
WEDGWOOD. In some instances the name is impressed in large capitals--

                               WEDGWOOD.

In others, it appears in small capital letters--

                               WEDGWOOD.

And in others, though not so commonly, in the ordinary type--

    Wedgwood.

On a few pieces the name occurs thus:

                               WEDGWOOD
                               ETRURIA.

 [Illustration: Fig. 589.]

On the ornamental goods (vases, medallions, &c.) in which Thomas
Bentley had an interest, the general mark was circular (Fig. 589), with
the letters _raised_, not sunk. Another was

                               WEDGWOOD
                              & BENTLEY,

and another

                               Wedgwood
                              & Bentley;

both being impressed.

With regard to these marks of “Wedgwood & Bentley” it may be well to
remark that all pieces bearing these names must have been made in the
twelve years between 1768 and 1780.

Besides these marks, a variety of smaller ones--letters, flowers,
figures, and numbers, both impressed and in colours, are to be seen on
the different varieties of wares. These are simply workmen’s marks, or
marks denoting period, &c., and, being private marks, concern only, and
are of interest only, to the proprietors themselves.

The classes of goods manufactured by the Messrs. Wedgwood at the
present day are much as they were in the times of the great Josiah.
The same block moulds are used; the same principles are acted upon
and carried out; the same mixture of bodies and glazes, with certain
modifications, are in daily use; the same varieties of goods are
manufactured; and consequently, many of his vases, medallions,
services, and other goods, are reproduced at the present time. And
although the ornamental goods now produced have not quite that charm
of super-excellence about them which those made in the days of the
first Josiah possess, Messrs. Wedgwood’s jasper and other ornamental
goods now stand as far in advance of their competitors of the present
day as those of the great Josiah did in advance of those of his own
time; they are simply unsurpassable both in design and execution. It
must be remembered that in the days of the first Josiah Wedgwood there
was little competition in other branches of the potter’s art, and the
great care, skill, and labour he bestowed upon his purely ornamental
pieces was, there can be no doubt, amply repaid in the high prices he
could obtain for them. This is not so now; for at the present day Art
productions of attractive and showy character are so extensively made
and so readily purchased at a low rate that the quiet, unobtrusive, but
truly lovely bas-reliefs originated by Wedgwood only command a limited
sale, and even then at such prices as will not admit of the same
scrupulous attention being paid to their production as in the earlier
days. That the present firm _can_ produce work equal in excellence
and beauty to that of their gifted ancestor is amply evidenced by
a Portland vase, which in 1877 they made--regardless of trouble or
cost--in exact imitation, both in colour and material, of the first
fifty. This was polished and cut by a lapidary, and forms a priceless
treasure of Art, and one that will bear the closest comparison with
the great Josiah’s greatest work. The firm still produce “jasper,”
“basaltes,” “red,” “cream-coloured,” and indeed all the other wares
for which the works in the olden times were so famous. The jasper
goods are still, as they have ever been since the first production of
that marvellous body, their principal feature--the great speciality of
their works. In this, since the days of Turner, although they have had
many imitators, they have never even been approached, and their goods
still maintain their old and high reputation. All the famous works of
the olden time--from the Portland vase down through all the chaste and
truly beautiful varieties of vases, plaques, medallions, services,
&c.--are still made in all their beauty, with the addition of many
new and ever-varying designs and combinations. In jasper, of which
some excellent examples are given in the engravings, Messrs. Wedgwood
have of late years produced some remarkably large and costly works.
Notably among these may be named the magnificent table decoration,
shown in London a few years back, and purchased by Sir Dudley Coutts
Marjoribanks from Messrs. Phillips & Pearce. It was designed by Mr.
Pearce, and considered to be a faultless _chef-d’œuvre_ of fictile
Art.

The jasper is produced in dark and in light blue of various shades
(with, of course, the raised figures and ornaments in white), in
sage-green, in pink, and other tints. It is also produced both in
“solid jasper”--that is, the solid coloured body throughout--and in
“jasper dip,” which is the white jasper body with the colour laid
on the surface. The “solid jasper” was re-introduced in 1856. The
manufacture of majolica was commenced at Etruria in 1860, and is
an important branch of the manufacture. With regard to majolica it
is necessary to state that the true Italian majolica, as well as
Minton’s reproductions of that famous ware, were made with a coarse
cane-coloured body and decorated with opaque enamel colours; but that
Messrs. Wedgwood were the first to use a white body and transparent
coloured glazes. By this process much greater brilliancy of effect is
produced than by the use of enamel colours.

In “malachite,” “mottled,” “agate,” and other wares, dessert, toilet,
and trinket services, and a variety of both useful and ornamental
articles, are made--ranging from the large-sized garden seat and the
gigantic vase down to the small and delicately-formed ladies’ ring
stand. In the “mottled” ware a marvellously rich and striking effect
is produced by the combination of brilliant colours, while in the
“malachite” the beautiful green and darker wavings of the stone are
well imitated.

“Parian” was made by the Messrs. Wedgwood at Etruria about 1848 or
1849, and was of good quality. In this both busts and figures were
produced, mainly of classical subjects, and the best modellers, Wyon,
Beattie, and others, were employed in their production.

Another variety of ornamental work is the “inlaid” ware, in which a
variety of articles are made. The effect of this style of ornamentation
is much the same as the wood “Tunbridge ware.” It is striking in its
novelty, and pleasing in its simplicity. This “inlaid ware” is made
by the same process as the famous “Henri Deux wares;” an impress from
a metal runner being filled up with a different coloured clay, and
afterwards turned or scraped level on the surface. In this ware a
magnificent and highly appropriate chess-table has been produced by
Messrs. Wedgwood to use with the celebrated Flaxman chess-men.

  [Illustration: Figs. 590 to 598.--Messrs. Wedgwood’s
  Productions. Lessore’s Europa Plateau, and other Wares.]

“Cream-coloured” ware, the veritable “Queen’s ware” of the olden
time, is still extensively made by Messrs. Wedgwood. Of a delicate
creamy whiteness in colour, light and pleasant to the touch, true and
close-fitting in the “potting,” and covered with a faultless glaze,
this ware still “holds its own,” and maintains its wonted supremacy.
In it, services and every variety of useful articles are made; and it
is pleasant to add that the pieces are still made in the old moulds
used in the great Josiah’s time, with only such modifications as fit
them for more modern notions. For instance, the “turin” modelled by
Flaxman, and charged for in his bill, which I have printed, is still
made, with only the addition of newly-designed handles, and hundreds
of others of the “ancient forms” are still in the same way preserved
and produced. In the “pearl” body, which is of great hardness and
durability and of a pure pearly whiteness, services and useful goods
are manufactured, in plain white, printed, and decorated varieties.
“Rockingham ware,” of a very superior quality and of a good colour,
is made largely at Etruria in tea-pots, coffee-pots, services (the
cups white inside), and other articles. The “porous ware” used for
water-bottles, butter-coolers, &c., is also made at the present time;
and the “mortar ware” is still made, and keeps foremost rank in the
market. In the “red ware”--a rich colour and fine body--services and
a large number of other articles are produced, and are frequently
ornamented with raised figures, &c., in black, with good and striking
effect. Blue printing was introduced at Etruria at an early date, and
has, with black, &c., been continued to the present day. Under the
third Josiah Wedgwood, from 1820 forward, this process was brought to
intense perfection. By making a special glaze for it--the result of
much deep thought and careful experimenting--he succeeded in giving
a rich, soft, almost flowing look to the colour, which gave it a
beauty and a richness that could not otherwise be attained. This
effect was afterwards imitated, but not so successfully, by means of
what is technically called a “flow”--that is by introducing a little
volatilising salt in the saggar in which the ware is placed and fired.

  [Illustration: Fig. 599.]

Messrs. Wedgwood employ a large number of clever modellers, painters,
gilders, and others, and many of the most skilled of workmen in every
department. The present firm is quite alive to the necessity of
keeping up to the full standard of excellence which the works have
attained, and are making rapid strides in new branches of decoration.
In order to give renewed life and greater variety to their bas-relief
goods in jasper, &c., they have engaged Mr. Charles Toft, who was
the principal figure modeller under Mr. Wilms at Elkington’s, who, at
the time I write, is busily engaged in bringing to perfection various
works intended for display at the Paris Exhibition of 1878. In place
of the lamented Mr. Lessore the firm have engaged Mr. Thomas Allen,
for many years known as the principal figure-painter at Minton’s, and
some of whose paintings on vases will also form a feature of the same
Exhibition. His work, it may be added, is mainly on the bisque, in
colours, which gain great brilliancy and a much heightened effect by
being glazed and fired in the oven at a high temperature.

  [Illustration: Figs. 600 to 609.--Painted by Lessore.]

The firm have of late introduced a process by which photographs of
original drawings, in colours, are produced on ware by the same method
as the autotype process. This forms a notable feature of progress in
scientific decoration, and it is only meet that as photography itself
was the undoubted discovery of a Wedgwood, its development as an aid to
ceramic decoration should be left to his successors at the present day.

  [Illustration: Fig. 610.--Ewer modelled by Protat, painted by
  Lessore.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 611 to 618.--Messrs. Wedgwood’s
  Productions. Lessore’s Wares.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 619.]

The principal painter at Etruria for many years was the late gifted M.
Emile Lessore, an artist of more than European reputation, who takes
rank above all others in that exquisite style for which he was so
famous. As M. Lessore (whom I had the privilege of knowing, and who
pressed me more than once to visit him at Marlotte) and his works are
so closely identified with Etruria, a few words on his career cannot
but be interesting. He was born in 1805, his father being a notary, for
which profession the son was at first intended. Giving up the law for
Art, he entered for a short time the studio of Ingres. When twenty-six
years old Lessore exhibited his first picture (“Le Frère Malade”) in
the Salon at Paris. This was in 1831, and from that time until 1850
he continued to exhibit both oil and water-colour pictures, which
were always eagerly sought for and purchased at high prices. In 1851
Lessore was induced, through offers made to him by the Sèvres china
manufactory, to turn his attention to china painting. He attempted to
introduce a more artistic feeling at Sèvres, and succeeded notably; a
pair of large vases decorated by him, which were exhibited in Paris in
1853, were purchased by the Emperor of Russia for a thousand guineas.
The originality of Lessore’s work caused a division amongst the artists
at Sèvres, and the partisans of the two camps were so virulently
wearisome in their disputes that he eventually abandoned Sèvres and
came to England, where he arrived in 1858, and was employed for a short
time by Mintons, but ultimately joined Messrs. Wedgwood, who thoroughly
appreciated his talents and his loyal sympathetic character. The
most remarkable of his works were shown in the Exhibition of 1862,
the Paris Exhibition of 1867, and at Vienna in 1873, and medals were
awarded to him in all countries. The climate of England, especially
Staffordshire, not suiting him he returned to France, living at
Marlotte, near Fontainebleau, where he still continued his connection
with the Wedgwoods, painting pieces and sending them to be fired at
Etruria. There is little doubt Emile Lessore was one of the first
artists in England to revolutionise the decoration of pottery, and some
of his pieces are undoubtedly more artistic than is usually produced in
faience; the drawing, without being laboured, is true to nature; the
colouring, as a rule, is subdued and delicate, but the master hand is
apparent in every touch. During the siege of Paris many of Lessore’s
finest works were concealed by him in the cellars of his cottage, and
afterwards preserved by Messrs. Wedgwood. He was the first to employ
the freedom of the artist’s brush to the decoration of pottery, which
previously to his time had been painted with the finish and stippled
perfection of the miniature painter, but without the imagination and
freshness of an artist’s sketch. M. Lessore died in the spring of 1876,
and soon afterwards his remaining works were sold by Messrs. Wedgwood
to Mr. Mortlock, by whom they were exhibited in London and disposed of.

The markets to which Messrs. Wedgwood’s goods are sent are more widely
spread than perhaps will be conceived by the uninitiated, and it is not
too much to say that, besides the home trade, which is very extensive,
the “Wedgwood ware” of the present day is dispatched, as it used to be,
to every quarter of the globe.




                              CHAPTER IX.

   Longton--Sutherland Road Works--Market Street Works--High
   Street Works--Park Works--Sheridan Works--Commerce
   Street Works--Crown Works--Stafford Street Works--Peel
   Pottery--King Street Works--Chancery Lane Works--St.
   Mary’s Works--Commerce Street--New Town Pottery--Borough
   Pottery--High Street--New Street--Prince of Wales Pottery--High
   Street Works--Alma Works--Market Street--Victoria
   Works--Stafford Street--Russell Street--Mount Pleasant
   Works--High Street--British Anchor Works--Royal Porcelain
   Works--Stafford Street--St. Gregory’s Pottery--Gold Street
   Works--Wellington Works--St. Martin’s Lane--Heathcote
   Works--Green Dock Works--Chadwick Street--Baddeley--Waterloo
   Works--Heathcote Road Pottery--Sutherland Potteries--Church
   Street--Cornhill Works--Sutherland Works--St. James’s
   Place--Daisy Bank--Park Hall Street--Viaduct Works--Beech, King
   Street--Anchor Pottery--Dresden Works--Palissy Works--Fenton,
   Minerva Works--Victoria Works--Fenton Potteries--Fenton
   Pottery--Foley--Old Foley Pottery--Anchor Works--Fenton
   Potteries--Lane Delph Pottery--Grosvenor Works--Park
   Works--Foley Pottery--Foley Potteries--Foley China Works--King
   Street Works--Heath--Bacchus--Meir--Harrison--Martin--Miles
   Mason--Whieldon--Wedgwood & Harrison--Turner--Garner--Edwards
   --Johnson--Phillips--Bridgwood--Greatbach--Greenwood--
   Heathcote, &c.


_Sutherland Road Works._--These works were commenced in 1862 by
Messrs. Adams, Scrivener, & Co. Mr. Scrivener having a few years
afterwards retired from the business, Mr. Adams was joined by Mr. Titus
Hammersley, and the concern was carried on by them under the style of
“Harvey Adams & Co.” until the death of Mr. Hammersley in 1875, when he
was succeeded by his son Mr. George Harris Hammersley; the style of the
firm remaining as before. The productions of the firm comprise china,
semi-china, and fine stoneware. In earthenware--toilet and all the
usual table services and numberless useful articles of the best designs
and highest finish are made. In stoneware--jugs, tea-pots, and other
articles are produced; in these many excellent shapes and designs have
been introduced. In china--tea, breakfast, dinner, dessert, trinket,
toilet, and other services; jugs of various kinds; vases, and an
endless variety of ornamental and highly decorated goods, are made. The
quality of the china is remarkably fine and good, and the glaze of more
than average excellence. The decorations are remarkable for purity of
conception, for admirable arrangement, for manipulative skill, and for
the thorough and perfect artistic feeling which pervades each design.
In tea and breakfast services many novel, but at the same time chastely
beautiful designs, have been introduced by this firm, who have also the
credit of being the first to make and introduce “moustache cups”--an
invention that has become so popular as to be adopted by many other
firms. These services are made by Messrs. Harvey Adams & Co. in every
style, from the simple white and gold (one variety of which, with a
beaded edge, is peculiarly simple and pretty) to the most richly, even
gorgeously painted, gilt, enamelled, and jewelled varieties; in each
of these their productions take rank with those of any other house. In
some services, both tea and dessert, what may be called an _ormolu_
decoration has been introduced with as good effect by this firm as by
any other. It gives a richness and a solidity to the patterns which
could not otherwise be easily obtained. The jewelling--especially the
pearl borders--is admirably executed, and with marked effect. Two
important features in the productions of these works--which, from first
being confined to the medium quality of common china, have gradually
progressed to the present time, when they rank among the highest and
best in the district--are, the introduction of silver both as a ground
and as a heightening, and of embossed leaf decoration of a peculiar and
artistic character. In like manner with gold, the silver is introduced
both dead and burnished, and forms a pleasing and marvellously rich
combination with gold and colour. It is introduced on tea services in
bands upon wreaths of flowers, and other decorations are painted with
marked effect. One of the finest and most chastely beautiful of the
ceramic productions of this or any other age or country is an open-work
plate in which solid silver forms the ground for the centre. On this
silver ground is painted, with all the skill that art is capable of, a
group of flowers as true to nature as if pencilled by nature herself;
the richness and delicacy of the colouring are “thrown up” and a finer
and more exquisitely beautiful effect produced by this ground than
could by any other means have been effected. The open-work rim, with
its interlaced ribbon, and the whole of the subordinate decorations,
are in excellent keeping and harmony with the central group.

In leaf-decoration Messrs. Harvey Adams & Co. have, with good taste,
introduced “shamrock” tea and breakfast sets, which have become
deservedly popular; embossed foliage dessert services; and fern and
foliage tea and dessert services and vases, and other ornamental
articles, all of which they have very wisely registered. These services
consist of upwards of fifty arranged groups of leaves of trees and
arrangements of ferns in relief, the whole of which have been modelled
from specimens obtained from the gardens of his Grace the Duke of
Sutherland, at Trentham Hall. These are painted both in the spring,
summer, and autumnal tints, with such scrupulous nicety, and so true
to nature, that it is next to impossible to fancy it is not the leaf
itself that lies on the plate.

The firm have more recently extended embossed relief by the
introduction of the primrose on tea, breakfast, and dessert services.
The leaves and flowers of the primrose are in relief, and are
beautifully painted and tinted from nature; they are also finished in
various styles, but always in strict accordance with the simplicity
of the original design. Messrs. Harvey Adams & Co. have also entered
very largely into the work of ornamental flowering in relief _à
la_ Dresden, and have brought out a number of good shapes in
vases, jardinières, and other articles, with flowers and plants
modelled on the ware, and painted true to nature. In this and in
other departments of the art-manufactory they secured the services of
several well-known artists; among them Mr. Henry Mitchell, medallist
of the Paris and Vienna Exhibitions, celebrated as an animal,
landscape, and figure painter, and whose works are remarkable for
their finish, their modelling, and their delicacy of treatment, and
whose greys and flesh tints are of peculiar purity and beauty; Mr.
Swan, and Mr. Longmore--the former a clever flower painter, and the
latter highly skilled in his artistic treatment of birds. The firm
has recently brought out in great variety a series of designs of
the Chinese, Japanese, and Persian style, consisting of figure and
floral decoration, and have adapted them to tea, breakfast, dessert,
and ornamental goods--the cobalt blue, introduced largely in these
patterns, being of a specially pure and rich colour; and while many
of these are for the general buyer, a very large number are of a high
class character. In these Mr. Slater, the art manager, has happily
realised the full force of the special characteristics of this ancient
style of art, and produced admirable works. Some of his plaques, which
are admirably drawn and exquisitely coloured, evince much force, and
show that he has thoroughly studied the works of these countries, and
is acquainted with the peculiarities of their gems of art.

The general art director of the works (which employ nearly seventy
artists, gilders, &c.) is Mr. Harvey Adams, to whose pure taste and
artistic judgment their high state of excellence is to be attributed;
the principal modeller being Mr. W. M. Clowes.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Illustration: Figs. 620 and 621.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 622 and 623.]

_Market Street Works._--These are said to be the oldest works
in Longton--the first there established--and to be contemporaneous
with those of Wedgwood at Etruria. They were originally carried on
by Cyples, afterwards by Cyples & Barker, who were succeeded by Mr.
Thomas Barlow. For many years Egyptian black and other tinted bodies
only were made, but these were of a fine and very superior character.
Lustre wares were also produced, and some of these were marked with
a large letter B impressed in the body. Later on china for foreign
markets was produced of good average quality, both in body and glaze.
Within the past few years the present proprietor, Mr. Thomas Barlow,
has successfully turned his attention to the production of the more
costly classes of decorated goods for the home markets, and in these
he now vies in excellency of body and glaze, and in purity and beauty
of design and decoration, with most other houses in the trade. In 1871
Mr. Barlow exhibited some of his productions, which attracted much
attention. Some of these are engraved on Figs. 632 to 643, and consist
of a selection of cups, saucers, and dessert-plates of remarkably
chaste and elegant design. The productions of these works consist
of tea, breakfast, dessert, and déjeuner services, and a number of
ornamental articles, in every style of decoration. The whole evidences
a purity of taste, a delicacy of finish, a chasteness of form, and
a harmony of colouring, in the highest degree creditable to the
proprietor. Many of Mr. Barlow’s designs and patterns are original and
worthy of high commendation. Mr. T. W. Barlow produces earthenware in
all the usual varieties at Coronation Works in Commerce Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

_High Street Works._--This manufactory, formerly belonging to the
Bridgwoods, and next to Cyples & Ball, has, since 1842, been carried on
by Messrs. Adams & Cooper. Formerly Egyptian black, brown, and lustre
wares, as well as china, were made, but china is now its exclusive
product; it is made both for home and foreign markets.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Park Works, High Street._--Messrs. Charles Allerton & Sons here
manufacture both earthenware and china in the usual varieties, as well
as gold and silver lustre wares, both for home markets and export. The
works were established in 1831.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Illustration: Figs. 624 to 631.--Barlow’s Tea Services.]

_Sheridan Works._--Built in 1858 by the late Mr. John Sheridan, the
works passed, in 1866, into the hands of Messrs. George Edwards & Co.,
and are now carried on by Mr. Edwards alone. About 1840 the business
of the present proprietor was commenced in Market Street, Longton, on
premises partly now occupied by Lloyd’s Bank, by Messrs. Thomas Cope
and James Edwards, and after the death of the former, was continued by
the late Mr. Edwards, who died in 1873 at the age of seventy-nine; the
present proprietor being his youngest son. The productions are china
tea, breakfast, and dessert services, both plain white and in every
style of decoration, both for the home and foreign markets. Among
the specialities are small cans and saucers richly and elaborately
decorated in gold and colours, in “Japan work,” for Morocco, Gibraltar,
and the Turkish markets, and tea-sets, tea-jars, kettles, &c.,
decorated in an immense variety of patterns, in imitation of ancient
Japanese examples, for the Dutch trade.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Commerce Street._--Messrs. H. Aynsley & Co. manufacture all the usual
varieties of lustre, Egyptian black, drab, turquoise, and painted
wares, as well as stoneware mortars, &c. The works were originally
carried on by Wooley, and afterwards by Robinson & Chetham. After
remaining for half a century in the family of Chetham they passed a
few years ago into the hands of their present proprietors. China of
superior character is made at Mr. John Aynsley’s manufactory in the
Sutherland Road.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Crown Works._--Messrs. Collingwood & Greatbach manufacture china
services, &c., of the commoner classes. The works were formerly carried
on by Anderson & Bellamy.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Crown Works, Stafford Street._--Mr. John Tams manufactures the usual
classes of earthenware.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Stafford Street Works._--These works, amongst the oldest in Longton,
were built, in 1799, by Messrs. John & Charles Harvey, and carried on
by them for some years, and were succeeded by Messrs. Hulme & Hawley,
from whom they repassed into the hands of the former family, being
carried on by Messrs. Charles & W. K. Harvey, sons of Mr. Charles
Harvey of the original firm. In 1841 these gentlemen worked three
manufactories in Longton. In 1853 Messrs. C. & W. K. Harvey were
succeeded by the present proprietors, Messrs. Holland & Green, by whom
the premises have been considerably extended. By the first two firms
common and useful earthenware was made, and these were continued by
C. & W. K. Harvey, who added china to the productions, and also, to a
large extent, gold lustre ware. Later on these were discontinued, and
the firm devoted themselves to printed goods and white granite ware,
chiefly for the North American markets. These were continued solely
by the present firm, until 1862, when Messrs. Holland & Green turned
their attention to the South American markets, which they now largely
supply. They established, a house abroad, and succeeded in introducing
a superior class--similar to those for the home trade, consisting
of printed and enamelled services, &c. This supply of an improved
class of patterns has produced an increased demand, and one that must
ultimately have a marked effect on the American trade. Messrs. H. &
G. also supply the home and Continental markets with all the usual
varieties of printed, enamelled, and gilt dinner, tea, and toilet
services, &c. The quality of the body is good, and the enamelling,
gilding, and other decorations, excellent. Many of the patterns are
rich and elegant, and all are carefully finished. Notably among these
are their new registered “bracelet” pattern, and a remarkably elegant
form for covered dishes. The gilding is of high character. They also
make sanitary ware. The works, as they have now been reconstructed,
are built on the most modern principles, and fitted with machinery for
turning jiggers and wheels, and also for preparing the clay. The mark
is the name of the pattern or body, the royal arms, and the name or
initials of the firm.

  [Illustration: IRONSTONE.

  HOLLAND & GREEN.

  REGINA

  H. & G.

  Figs. 632 and 633.]

The toilet services produced by this firm are of superior quality; the
ground colours, rose-du-barry, Brunswick green, &c., of great clearness
and beauty, and the gilding rich and elaborate.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Peel Pottery._--These works, originally belonging to Mr. Stirrup,
passed successively into the hands of Messrs. Bell, Deakin, & Procter;
Mr. Deakin; Messrs. Webb & Walters; and Messrs. Webb & Co. From the
last named they passed into the hands of the present proprietor, Mr.
John Green. The first three firms originally produced common classes
of earthenware. China was added by Messrs. Webb & Walters, and is now
alone made. Mr. Green produces china of more than average excellence in
body and of various styles of decoration, chiefly for the home trade; a
fair proportion, however, being exported. Many are richly gilt, and the
floral and other decorations carefully painted.

       *       *       *       *       *

_King Street and Market Street._--At these works, which have been
established half a century, Mr. John Lockett manufactures all the usual
varieties of earthenware, china, stoneware, lustre, Egyptian black,
drab, and other wares, both for the home and export markets. In 1862 he
produced some special examples for the exhibition of that year; these
are shown in the accompanying group.

  [Illustration: Figs. 634 to 639.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Chancery Lane._--Messrs. Taylor, Hudson, & Middleton here produce all
the ordinary varieties of china ware.

       *       *       *       *       *

_High Street._--Established about 1840, by Mr. Thomas Cooper, these
works were afterwards carried on by Keeling, Walker, & Cooper, and
Keeling & Walker, the latter of whom, Mr. John Walker, is now the sole
proprietor. He manufactures the ordinary classes of earthenware, gold
and silver lustre, figures, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

_St. Mary’s Works, Mount Pleasant._--This manufactory was carried on
from 1830 till 1852 by Messrs. Moore & Hamilton, and so continued
until 1859, when Mr. Samuel Moore became sole owner. In 1862 he built
the present manufactory, and in 1870 was succeeded by his two sons,
Bernard and Samuel Moore, who from that time have carried on the
business under the style of “Moore Brothers.” The productions have,
from the first, been china of a good marketable quality, in which
all the usual breakfast, tea, dinner, dessert, déjeuner, and other
services, more or less decorated, are made; but in addition to this,
attention has been given with marked success to the development of
the strictly ornamental departments. A camel teapot--the Arab tying
on the bale forming an excellent handle, and the neck and head of the
camel an admirable spout--is a well-conceived design, and is powerfully
and cleverly modelled. For table decoration, the firm produces many
good designs. Notably among these is a group of three well-modelled
Cupids (two of whom are carrying the third), the upper one of which
bears a turquoise shell, massively gilt inside. It is of very artistic
design, and is well executed. The Persian turquoise glaze made by the
firm is remarkably clear and brilliant in colour and not surpassed
by other houses. In enamelling, Messrs. Moore Brothers have made
much progress, some of their designs in cloissonné enamelling being
highly effective, both in form of vessel and in arrangement of colour.
Notably among these are “pilgrims’ bottles,” the rich and massive
gilding of which throws out and relieves the enamelling in a very
marked and effective manner. In china, and also in majolica, Japanese
reproductions are made; in these the well-known Chinese ruby glaze has
been cleverly imitated; it is rich and full in colour. A turquoise
majolica jardinière, the design being water-lilies, is well designed.
Mirror frames of large size are also a speciality of these works.
Messrs. Moore Brothers’ operations are principally confined to the home
markets, a large proportion of their goods bearing the name of the
dealers, “T. Goode & Co., London.” The mark of the makers is either the
name “MOORE” or “Moore,” impressed on the body of the ware; “_Moore_,”
incised; or “MOORE BROS.,” painted on the surface.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Commerce Street._--The works, now carried on by Mr. Thomas Walters
(late Walters & Hulse), were, he informs me, established by Messrs.
Riddle & Lightfoot. The productions are china of ordinary quality for
both home and export markets.

       *       *       *       *       *

_New Town Pottery._--Erected in 1845 by Mr. J. Meakin, who continued
it until 1850, when it passed to Messrs. Stanley & Lambert, who in
1855 were succeeded by Messrs. J. & H. Procter & Co., who produced
common earthenware in the usual cream colour, printed, painted, and
lustred varieties; the mark was a crown upon a ribbon, bearing the
word WARRANTED; over the crown STAFFORDSHIRE, and beneath the ribbon P
for Procter. In 1876 the works passed into the hands of Messrs. Dale,
Page, & Goodwin, of the _Church Street Works_, and are carried on by
them. The _Church Street Works_ were established in the latter half
of last century, and in 1780 were carried on by Mr. John Forrester,
who was succeeded, in 1795, by Messrs. Hilditch & Sons, who in their
productions followed closely in the wake of Josiah Spode and Thomas
Minton; at which time most of the processes here were carried out by
female hands. In 1830 the firm changed to that of “Hilditch & Hopwood,”
who, at the Exhibition of 1851, sent up some notable examples of their
productions, one of which was a dessert service decorated in the
Renaissance style in gold, with landscape and figure vignettes, mainly
illustrative of Scott’s “Marmion;” and they also exhibited some very
successful imitations of Indian china, prepared by them from designs
by Mr. Shorter, of London. The tea services exhibited at the same time
were remarkable for their excellent body, the design and execution of
the painted decoration, the high class of the ground colours, and the
massiveness of the gilding. One example, with raised antique foliage
in gold on the fine old “Derby blue” ground, was especially good;
while the painting of others, with small landscapes in medallions, and
wreaths of flowers, was far beyond average merit. In 1858, on the death
of Mr. William Hopwood, the works were continued by the trustees till
May, 1867, when the business, stock, and plant, including the moulds,
copper-plates, &c., were sold to the present firm of Dale, Page, &
Co., who, as just stated, in 1876 removed to the larger premises
called New Town Works. The productions of the firm consist of all the
usual services in china, and are of a better class than those of many
other houses. In tea and breakfast services the firm is particularly
successful in designs where leaves, accurately copied from nature,
are carelessly thrown on grounds of various tints; the green ground,
with geranium leaves, being especially pleasing. Others with wreaths
of roses on the same ground, and others again closely diapered with
burnished gold, are among their more successful patterns. Others
of their productions are dessert services with fruit, flowers, and
landscapes, and with richly designed festoons, borders, and gilding;
dinner services; richly gilt and enamelled jet ware, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Borough Pottery._--These extensive works were established in 1869
by Messrs. Cartwright & Edwards. They are very extensive, and are built
as a “model factory” of the present day. The ovens are built on the
down-draught system; the smoke is conveyed to large chimneys (one 50
yards, and the other 26 yards, high), and the enamel and other kilns
all work in the same chimneys. The clay is prepared by machinery--both
the blunging, sifting, and other processes--and the water is taken out
by pressure (a process now generally adopted), so that fuel is entirely
dispensed with except at the engine. All the throwing-wheels and
jiggers are turned by steam power, and the workshops are fitted with
steam drying stoves, so that no fires whatever are used in drying the
goods. The goods produced are the ordinary classes of earthenware.

       *       *       *       *       *

_High Street._--Messrs. Thomas Birks & Co. manufacture china,
earthenware, and gold and silver lustre of the more ordinary qualities.

       *       *       *       *       *

_New Street.-_-Messrs. Cooper, Till, & Co. produce both earthenware and
china goods of the more ordinary qualities.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Prince of Wales Pottery._--These works, in Sutherland Road, were
established by Mr. Benjamin Shirley, of Bangor, in Wales, on the day
of the marriage of H.R.H. the Prince of Wales, March 10th, 1863, and
were in honour of that event named the “Prince of Wales’ Works.” They
were carried on for a time by Benjamin Shirley and Walter Freeman,
under the style of “Shirley & Freeman,” late of the Sheridan Works,
and on the death of the former, in 1864, Mr. Titus Hammersley became a
partner with Mr. Freeman. In 1866 Edward Asbury joined the firm, which
was carried on as “Hammersley, Freeman, & Co.” In 1870 Mr. Freeman
retired from the concern, and the style at that time was “Hammersley
& Asbury.” Since the death of Mr. Hammersley, in 1875, the works have
been continued by Mr. Asbury alone, under the style of “Edward Asbury
& Co.” The goods produced are china tea, coffee, dessert, and trinket
services--a special feature, however, being articles bearing local
views in colours, for sale at watering-places--principally for the home
markets, but goods are also shipped to Australia and the United States.
The mark used is the Prince of Wales’ feathers with the letters H. & A.
in a garter, or A. & Co.

       *       *       *       *       *

_High Street Works._--Mr. Walter Freeman, just spoken of as a
proprietor successively of the “Sheridan” and of the “Prince of
Wales” Works, withdrew from the latter in 1870 and entered on this
manufactory, and in these he competes successfully with many of the
other houses. Mr. Freeman’s productions are confined to china, in which
he produces all the usual tea, breakfast, and dessert services in great
variety of style; trinket sets for toilet, and other articles, both
enamelled, painted, printed, and otherwise decorated: these are made
for the home, American, and Australian markets. The quality of the ware
and the style of decoration are higher than the average.

       *       *       *       *       *

_New Market Works, Market Street._--These are among the oldest works
in Longton. Half a century or more ago they were occupied by Messrs.
Martin & Cope for the manufacture of lustre ware and china. They were
succeeded by Abel Booth, and after other changes the manufactory came
into the hands of Messrs. Glover, Colclough, & Townsend, who were
extensively engaged for the Eastern markets. From this firm the works
passed to Messrs. Skelson & Plant, and from them to the late Mr. George
Copestake, sen., and from him to Messrs. Radford & Co. The productions
are china tea, breakfast, and dessert services, &c., chiefly for the
home trade.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Alma Works, High Street._--Messrs. Copestake & Allen produce here the
ordinary services, &c., in china.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Market Street._--Messrs. Knight & Rowley produce all the usual classes
of china goods in tea, breakfast, and dessert services, &c., for the
home and foreign markets. Many of their shapes and patterns are of
great beauty, and the quality of the body is good; notably among their
shapes for tea services the “Napier” is remarkable for its neatness and
simplicity; it is a great advance on the usual white and gold services.
It was here that the late Mr. Sampson Bridgwood made his first start,
and after noble struggles against adversity laid the foundation of his
ultimate splendid success.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Victoria Works._--Built by the late Mr. Ralph Shaw about 1828, these
works still remain the property of his executors. About 1853 they
were taken by Mr. Joseph Finney, who still carries on the business.
For the first fifteen years of Mr. Shaw’s working, earthenware was
manufactured, but it was then converted into china works and has so
continued to the present time. The goods produced are the usual classes
of tea, breakfast, and dessert services, and fancy goods of fair
average quality in body and decoration for home and foreign markets.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Stafford Street._--Mr. James Dawson occupies these works and produces
ordinary earthenware of the usual classes.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Russell Street._--Mr. William Edwards manufactures ordinary
earthenware.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Mount Pleasant Works._--Hallam, Johnson, & Co., late Wood & Co.,
manufacture ordinary qualities of china.

       *       *       *       *       *

_High Street._--Messrs. Richard Hodson & Co., china services of the
ordinary quality.

       *       *       *       *       *

_British Anchor Works, Anchor Road._--At these works, occupied by Mr.
J. T. Hudden, earthenware only is made.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Royal Porcelain Works, Forrester Street, Anchor Road_ (Messrs.
Robinson & Chapman).--These works have been built as a “model factory.”
All the throwing-wheels and jiggers are turned by steam power, and
many other operations, which under the old system were done by manual
labour, are here carried on by the aid of steam. China of a superior
quality and style of decoration is produced at these works.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Stafford Street._--Messrs. Hudson & Son produce ordinary china
services.

       *       *       *       *       *

_St. Gregory’s Pottery._--These works, in High Street, were
established in 1794 by Mr. G. Barnes, and were successively held by
him and his partner Mr. Wood (under the style of Barnes & Wood), by
Messrs. Wood & Blood, Mr. Chesworth; Messrs. Beardmore & Birks, and Mr.
G. Townsend, from whom they passed in 1864 to Messrs. Tams & Lowe; they
now belong to Mr. William Lowe alone. The goods produced comprise all
the usual varieties of articles in useful ordinary earthenware, and in
china of an average quality. In the former, dinner, tea, toilet, and
other services, &c., are made in white, sponged, printed, ground-laid,
and gilt varieties; in the latter only the ordinary common classes are
made, principally for the home trade. The quality of the body is firm
and good, and the mosaic jugs and tea-pots, mounted and otherwise,
are well formed and decorated. In these and in the reeded turquoise
tea-pots, &c., the ground colours are clear and even. The usual mark in
the common willow pattern is a garter, with the words STAFFORDSHIRE
IMPROVED, enclosing the name of the pattern and the Staffordshire
knot; the ribbon is surmounted by a crown, and beneath are the initials
of the firm, T. & L.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Gold Street Works, near Stafford Street_ (Barker Brothers).--This
is one of the oldest manufactories in Longton, and it is historically
interesting from the fact of gold lustre having been here first
discovered and applied to decorative purposes. The earthenware here
made is of the ordinary medium quality, both for home and for foreign
markets, including the Cape of Good Hope, Western Africa, Australia,
South America, Turkey, &c. It consists of cream-coloured, white,
fancy-sponged, painted and printed, enamelled and other descriptions,
in toilet, dinner, breakfast and tea services, and other articles.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Wellington Works._--These works, in Stafford Street, were established
in 1862 by Messrs. G. L. Robinson & W. Cooper, the latter retiring
after a few years in favour of Mr. G. L. Robinson, when the firm
became Robinson & Son. In 1871 Mr. G. L. Robinson retired in favour
of his son Mr. G. A. Robinson, who became a partner, and the firm now
is “Robinson, Repton, & Robinson.” The class of china manufactured is
of the best finished kind, and is suited, in style and decoration,
both for the principal home and foreign markets. The goods principally
produced are tea, breakfast, dessert, and other services; toilet
trinket-ware, vases, centre-pieces, &c., and a large variety of
ornamental china goblets, fruit and other baskets, open-work (or
pierced) comports, moustache cups of the same construction as those
already spoken of, and the general varieties of articles which are
made in this material. The body of Messrs. Robinson’s china is of good
pure quality, and the decoration artistic and clever. Some of the tea
services are peculiarly chaste in design and rich in colouring; and the
gilding, enamelling, and painting are good. The jewelling and embossing
of some of the services, and the happy combinations of colours in
others, combined with careful artistic treatment, show how thoroughly
the designing as well as the manufacturing departments are “managed” by
this enterprising firm.

Messrs. Robinson & Co. at _The Foley_, also produce china of the
usual classes, both for home and export trades.

       *       *       *       *       *

_St. Martin’s Lane._ (Taylor, Hudson, & Middleton.)--At these works,
which have been established about forty years, a general assortment of
plain and decorated china, in all the various services, is made both
for home and foreign markets.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Heathcote Works._--Established in 1854 by Messrs. William Brammall
and John Dent, from whom it passed to William Brammall, then to
Messrs. Edwin Brammall and T. S. Repton, and is now carried on by W.
H. Derbyshire & Co. The works are in Heathcote Road. The manufactures
consist of china tea, breakfast, and other services, and all the usual
useful articles in that material suitable for the home trade.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Green Dock Works._--Messrs. Cooper, Till, & Co. (formerly Hampson
Brothers) manufacture improved stoneware, ordinary earthenwares,
and lustres, for the home, American, Australian, and other markets.
Established in 1846.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Chadwick Street._--Messrs. Frederick Jones & Co. manufacture
earthenware of the more ordinary class.

       *       *       *       *       *

_High Street._--Mr. J. L. Johnson produces all the usual services,
&c. in the commoner classes of china.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Baddeley._--About 1720 William Baddeley (an old name in the district)
commenced making brown ware at Eastwood, Hanley. About 1740, having
invented an “engine-lathe,” he began to make “turned articles in
cane and brown ware. He was succeeded in the pottery by his son,
William Baddeley; his other son, John Baddeley, taking the business
of the lathe making, by which he acquired a competency, and died
in 1841, aged eighty-five.” This second William Baddeley made many
improvements in the ware, and attempted, both by an imitation of
body of his vitreous wares, and by his mark, to palm off some of his
goods as Wedgwood’s. His mark was the word EASTWOOD impressed on the
ware, but he contrived always to have the EAST indistinct and the
WOOD clear (EASTWOOD), thus hoping to catch the unwary by the latter
syllable. He died at an advanced age, and the works at Eastwood having
been sold, his son, William Baddeley, commenced in Queen Street,
Hanley, for the manufacture of terra-cotta articles, and a large
trade was carried on in earthenware knobs for tin and japanned tea
and coffee-pots. He also made fancy pipes, japanned terra cotta, and
other goods. He also, at the Market Lane Works, “was the first to make
telegraph insulators in iron moulds with screw and lever pressure.”
The works were in 1846 removed to Longton (Wharf Street), and here
the manufacture of imitation stag, buck, and buffalo-horn, and bone
handles for knives, forks, &c., for the Sheffield trade, was first
introduced. In this branch “a very good trade was done, but the working
handlers of Sheffield refused to work them up, and threats were sent
to several masters, that if they did not give up the terra-cotta
knife-handle trade, their works would be blown up.” The masters, thus
intimidated, gave up the use of these handles, and on Mr. Baddeley
visiting Sheffield, an attack was made on his life, and letters sent
to him on his return threatening that if he did not give up making
the handles, he and his works “would be done for.” The manufacture
was then discontinued. Mr. Baddeley “invented the thimble placing
rack, now so extensively used; this he sold to Elias Leak, of Longton,
who, in 1856, took out a patent for the invention.” Mr. Baddeley, who
died in 1864, held the St. Martin’s Lane Works, and his widow now
carries on business in Commerce Street. Their son, William Baddeley,
commenced manufacturing in the Normacott Road, in 1862. His productions
were rustic terra-cotta articles for floral, horticultural, useful,
and decorative purposes; the principal articles being fern-stands,
vases, flower-stands, hyacinth-pots, flower-pots, garden-seats,
flower-baskets, mignonette-boxes, crocus-pots, globe-stands, brackets,
inkstands, &c. The designs were all taken from nature, and appropriate
to the intended use of the vessel. His imitations of bark, &c., and of
various woods and plants, were remarkably good.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Waterloo Works_, Stafford Street. (Brough & Blackhurst).--Built
in 1815, the year of the Battle of Waterloo, and in honour of that
event named the “Waterloo” Works. The date 1815 occurs on one of the
ovens. The manufactory formerly belonged to Messrs. Ratkin & Booth,
who were so justly celebrated for their gold and silver lustre wares.
At these works, which are large and commodious, are produced the
ordinary classes of earthenware suitable both for the home and for
foreign markets, enamelled and gilt services, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Heathcote Road Pottery._--Messrs I. and H. Procter removed here in
1876 from the New Town Pottery. The productions are common earthenware
in the usual cream colour, printed, painted, and lustred varieties.
The mark is a crown upon a ribbon, bearing the words WARRANTED; over a
crown is STAFFORDSHIRE, and beneath the ribbon P for Procter.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Sutherland Pottery_, Daisy Bank.--Established in 1870 by Mr. Joseph
Holdcroft, their present proprietor, for the manufacture of majolica,
Parian, and silver lustre ware for the home, continental, South
American, and Australian markets. Mr. Holdcroft, who for eighteen years
was in the employment of Minton & Co., commenced business in another
manufactory in Longton, which he left on the erection of his present
pottery. His majolica productions are of a high class, both in design,
in quality, and in workmanship; a “Wren Vase,” with well-modelled birds
and flowers, is a speciality of his works. His mark is his initials
[symbol] impressed in the ware.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Church Street._--These works, for the production of Parian, jasper,
and majolica ware, belonging to Mr. G. A. Robinson, were pulled down
in 1876 for town improvements, Mr. Robinson erecting new works in
Sutherland Road.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Cornhill Works._--Messrs. Poole & Unwin entered on these works, which
had previously been carried on as general earthenware works by others,
in 1871. The productions are middle-class earthenware; stoneware jugs,
&c., chiefly intended for the home market. Gold and silver lustres of
the ordinary kind, and rustic majolica, were also at one time made. The
initials of the firm are [symbol] impressed in the body of the ware.

  [Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Sutherland Works_, Barker Street.--Established by the present
proprietor, Mr. Sampson Smith, for the production of china, tea,
and other services, silver and gold lustre, and china figures and
ornaments.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Sutherland Pottery_, Normacott Road.--These works were established by
their present proprietors, Messrs. Skelson & Plant, who were previously
of the New Market Works, Chancery Lane, Longton, and the Heathcote Road
Pottery. They are also proprietors of the _Heathcote Road Pottery_.
These latter were established by Mr. Thomas Beardmore, and much
enlarged by Messrs. Stubbs & Bridgwood, before they came into the hands
of Skelson & Plant. At these works china is made in all the usual
useful services.

       *       *       *       *       *

_St. James’s Place._--The St. James’s works were established by
William Bradshaw, and afterwards occupied by John Gerard, Jesse Cope &
Co., and Baggaley & Ball. In 1831 they were taken by Robert Gallimore,
who about 1840 was joined in partnership by George Shubotham. In 1842
Mr. Gallimore retired from the concern, and the business was then
continued by George Shubotham and William Webberley, under the style of
“Shubotham & Webberley.” In 1847 Mr. Shubotham died, and the works are
now carried on by Mr. Webberley alone. In 1858 this gentleman purchased
the premises, and soon afterwards pulled down the old buildings and
erected the present commodious “four-oven” manufactory. Originally
lustre ware only was produced, but china was added by Mr. Gallimore.
In 1844 lustre was entirely abandoned, and since that time china alone
has been made. This is produced in all the usual services both for the
home, Dutch, and Australian markets. No mark is used.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Daisy Bank._--These are among the most historically interesting
works in this immediate locality. They were built in the latter part of
last century by a Mr. Hughes, and passed successively through the firms
of Drury, Ray, & Tideswell, and Ray & Wynne, to Charles James Mason
& Co., who succeeded the latter firm. It was in these works that Mr.
Mason produced his ever famous “Ironstone china,” the firm at that time
being “George Miles Mason and Charles James Mason,” and subsequently
“C. J. Mason” only. The patent taken out by C. J. Mason in 1813 was
for “a process for the improvement of the manufacture of English
porcelain;” the process, according to the specification, consisting
“in using scoria or slag of ironstone pounded and ground in water, in
certain proportions, with flint, Cornwall stone, and clay, and blue
oxide of cobalt;” doubtless, however, this was not correct so far as
the first ingredients are concerned. It should also be added that the
name “Ironstone” was simply a combination of “iron” and “stone,” used
to denote the extreme hardness of the body, as combining the strength
of both. From various causes the manufactory, after some years, became
a commercial failure, though a great artistic and manipulative success;
in 1851 the patent right, moulds, copper-plates, &c. were sold to Mr.
Morley; and in 1853 the lease of the premises was sold to Messrs.
Hulse, Nixon, and Adderley. (For an account of Mason’s ironstone china,
&c. see pages 315, 407, and 408.)

The freehold of the premises was afterwards purchased from John
Edward Heathcote, Esq., by Hulse, Nixon, and Adderley. In 1869 Mr.
Nixon died, and the firm was changed to “Hulse and Adderley,” and so
continued until 1874, when (Mr. Hulse having died in the preceding
year) it was altered to that of “William A. Adderley,” who was the
surviving partner, and is now the sole proprietor of the place. Since
Mason’s time the premises have been very considerably enlarged and
improved. The productions are china and earthenware for the home,
Canadian, West Indian, South American, Australian, New Zealand, and
continental markets, the operations being conducted on a large scale.
No distinctive mark is used.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Park Hall Street._--Messrs. Daniel Sutherland & Sons entered on
these works in 1863, and they are now carried on by the sons under
the same style. The productions are majolica and Parian of various
qualities. In the former, jugs of an infinite variety of shapes and
patterns; vases, tripods, and flower-holders; Stilton cheese, butter,
and sardine stands and boxes; bread, cheese, and fruit dishes;
water-bottles; tea and coffee-pots; kettles; flower-pots; brackets, and
scent-jars, taper-stands, candlesticks, and other articles are largely
made. In Parian, the firm produces groups, figures, busts, &c., in
considerable variety, as well as all the usual lesser articles, jugs,
brooches, crosses, and trinkets. Stoneware jugs, tea-pots, &c., are
also made. The mark of the firm was formerly S & S, but none
is now used.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Viaduct Works_, Caroline Street.--Established about 1836. This
manufactory, in 1863, passed into the hands of Cooper, Nixon, &
Co., and next to Cooper and Dethick. They produce plain and printed
earthenware of the ordinary kinds, and drab and other coloured bodies,
both for the home and foreign markets. The mark is the initials of the
firm, C & D.

       *       *       *       *       *

_High Street and Sutherland Road._--Messrs. James Beech & Co., the
present proprietors, opened those works about 1846. They produce all
the usual tea, breakfast, and dessert services in china of a more than
ordinary quality, and in various styles of decoration. They are also
grinders of flint and stone for the trade.

       *       *       *       *       *

_King Street._--These works were established in 1875, being opened
on March 25th of that year, by their present proprietors, Messrs.
Bridgett, Bates, & Beech. They manufacture china only, but in this are
produced all the usual services in every variety of style. No mark is
used, but the productions are both for the home and foreign markets.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Anchor Pottery._--Messrs. Sampson Bridgwood, & Sons, who are
extensive manufacturers, first carried on business in the Market Street
Works, and next for many years at a manufactory in Stafford Street,
originally occupied by G. Forrester, which was purchased by the late
commissioners of Longton, and pulled down for the erection of the
present market buildings. They then removed to their present works,
the “Anchor Pottery,” where they produce both china and earthenware.
In china all the usual tea, breakfast, and dessert services are made,
partly for the home, but principally for the United States and Canadian
markets. In earthenware they produce largely the white granite for the
United States, Australian, and Canadian trade, and they also produce
for the home market. One of their specialities is what is technically
called “Parisian granite” (stamped as “Limoges”), which is of fine
hard durable body and excellent glaze. In this ware, tea, breakfast,
dessert, dinner, and toilet services are largely produced; many are of
excellent design. The marks used are, on china, an impressed stamp of
the name “S. BRIDGWOOD & SON.” The Parisian granite bears the impressed
stamp, an oval, with the word “LIMOGES,” and in the centre
P. G. (for Parisian granite). It also bears the printed mark
of an elaborate shield of arms with mantling, sceptres, &c., and the
words “PORCELAINE OPAQUE,” “BRIDGWOOD & SON.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_Dresden Works_, Normacott Road, established by Mr. John
Proctor.--These works, after being worked successively by Messrs.
Glover & Colclough, and Messrs. Goodwin & Bullock, came into the hands
of the present firm of Mason, Holt, & Co., in 1858, since which time
they have been much enlarged. All the usual tea, breakfast, dessert,
and other services, in china of excellent commercial quality, are made,
both for home and foreign markets.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Dresden Works_, Stafford Street.--These works were established by
Mr. John Ferneyhough, and in 1858 passed into the hands of Messrs.
Shelley & Hartshorne, who were succeeded by Messrs. Adams & Scrivener,
who in turn were again succeeded by, in 1866, John Ferneyhough, who
manufactures all the usual varieties of services, &c. in china of good
quality.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Palissy Works_, Chancery Lane.--These works were erected in 1862,
by Mr. R. H. Grove, for the purpose of decorating, not manufacturing,
china ware. In 1867 he retired, and was succeeded by his son, Mr.
Fredk. Wedgwood Grove, and his partner, Mr. John Stark, who continued
them for decorating purposes alone until 1867, when they commenced
manufacturing, having increased the premises for the purpose, and
erected the necessary kilns and machinery. They manufacture earthenware
only. In this all the usual dinner, dessert, toilet, and other services
and domestic articles are produced, and of all degrees of decoration,
from plain and printed up to enamelled and gilt varieties. Some of
their more beautiful patterns are the “Hindoo,” “Arabesque,” and
“Shell,” and these are made in a variety of styles of more or less
richness in detail. Spirit and wine show-barrels or casks are also
specialities.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Minerva Works, Fenton._--In 1812 these works were held by Charles
James Mason & Co., the producers of the famous “Patent Ironstone
China” (which see), and from them passed to Messrs. Pratt & Co., who
were succeeded by Mr. Gerard (or Jerrad) and Mr. Richard Hassall.
About 1833 or 1834 Mr. Hassall was joined in partnership by Mr. Thomas
Green (son of Mr. Thomas Green, of the Churchyard Works at Burslem),
of Bank House, Fenton, who produced the common classes of china.
Shortly afterwards, Mr. Hassall retired, and Mr. Green was joined in
partnership by Mr. W. Richards, of Great Fenton, and the business was
continued by “Green & Richards,” until 1847, when the latter withdrew.
The business was then continued by Mr. Thomas Green alone, until his
decease in 1859; from that date to the present time it has been carried
on by his widow, Mrs. Margaret Green, under the trading style of “M.
Green & Co.” under the careful management of her sons. The china made
by the earlier firms was of the commonest kind of blue figured, white
and gold, and lustre wares. During the partnership of Mr. Richards,
a variety of ornaments, small ewers and basins, toy mugs and jugs,
&c., were extensively made; this trade was, however, checked by the
introduction of a similar, but cheaper, class of goods from France.
This had a good effect on the firm, for it induced attention to be
turned to a better class of productions; and this again was more
decisively done in 1851, when goods of a highly creditable character
were made. The present productions of Messrs. M. Green & Co. are china
tea, breakfast, dessert, trinket, and other services; toy sets; jugs,
mugs, feeders, wheel-barrow, and spade salts; and a large variety of
other articles, both for home and foreign markets.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Victoria Works_, for many years carried on by Mr. S. Ginders, are now
held by Mr. James Reeves, who produces the more ordinary qualities of
earthenware.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Fenton Potteries._--The goods produced are of the commoner class of
printed, sponged, and pearl-white granite wares suitable for British
North American, United States, West Indian, African, and Indian
markets. None are produced for the home trade. The works are carried
on by Messrs. W. Baker & Co., who were awarded a medal at the Paris
Exhibition.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Fenton Pottery._--This was established in 1825, by Messrs. C.
J. & G. M. Mason, for the manufacture of their famous “Ironstone
China” ware (which see). “The works of C. J. Mason & Co.,” says Ward,
in 1843, “standing obliquely to two turnpike-roads, and on the line
of the Canal Company’s railway, present an extensive front of four
stories in height, inscribed in large letters ‘Patent Ironstone China
Manufactory.’ For this article of trade, which Messrs. G. & C. J. Mason
introduced some years ago, they obtained extensive public favour, and
an almost exclusive sale, on account of its resemblance to porcelain,
and its very superior hardness and durability.” Messrs. Mason were
succeeded by Mr. Samuel Boyle, from whom the works passed into the
hands of Messrs. E. & C. Challinor, formerly E. Challinor & Co. of
Sandyford and Tunstall, who still carry them on. The goods produced
are white granite, printed, sponged, and common earthenware, for the
American, Australian, and other foreign and colonial markets. In these,
tea, coffee, breakfast, dinner, toilet, and other services, and all
the usual useful articles, are largely produced. The white granite, or
ironstone china, is of good, hard, sound, and durable quality; some of
their most successful embossed patterns being the Ceres or Wheat, the
Garland, and the Vine-leaf patterns. In jugs, Messrs. Challinor produce
the Ceres or Wheat, Paris, Garland, Barberry, Lily, Missouri, Florence,
Versailles, Lotus or Cora, and other shapes, both plain and embossed.
The earthenware is of the ordinary common quality, specially designed
and well adapted for the various markets to which it is sent.

The marks are the Staffordshire knot [symbol] impressed in the ware--

  [Illustration:

    E & C CHALLINOR
    FENTON

    E & C CHALLINOR

    IRONSTONE
    CHINA
    E & C CHALLINOR]

within an ornamental border, surmounted by the royal arms, &c., also
impressed in the ware; and the following printed on the surface:--the
royal arms with crown, supporters, motto, &c., and, beneath, a ribbon
with IRONSTONE CHINA, E & C CHALLINOR FENTON; the name of the pattern,
as “Australia,” “Gothic,” “Portland,” &c. within various borders, &c.,
and the name E & C CHALLINOR, or E & C C.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Old Foley Pottery._--Messrs. Moore & Co., late Samuel Bridgwood,
produce white granite ware, of the ordinary character, for the American
markets.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Anchor Works_, Market Street.--These works were carried on for some
years by T. and J. Carey, until about 1845, when they came into the
possession of Mr. Ashwell, who occupied them for about thirteen years.
They were afterwards carried on by Mr. W. Green, from whom they passed
to Copestake Brothers, and are now occupied by Mr. George Copestake,
who produces china of the usual varieties for both the home and foreign
markets.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Fenton Potteries._--These works appear to have been in the hands
of the present firm, Messrs. Pratt, ever since the commencement of
this century. The style of the firm is “F. & R. Pratt & Co.,” and they
produce all the ordinary classes of earthenware goods in services, and
the usual useful and ornamental articles. They are large makers of
“druggists’ sundries,” as that particular branch of trade is described,
for which they are in high repute. Messrs. Pratt also produce a variety
of articles in a peculiarly compact, vitreous terra cotta; the colour
is a good, full, rich red, and the enamel ornamentation is usually
artistically arranged. Another speciality of this firm is under-glaze
colour-printing, for which, and their Etruscan ware, they received
a medal at the 1851 Exhibition. A silver medal was also awarded to
them by the Society of Arts for a pair of the largest Etruscan-style
vases up to that time produced; they were exhibited in 1851, and were
purchased by the Prince Consort.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Lane Delph Pottery_ (John Pratt & Co.).--These works have been in the
hands of the present firm for above half a century. The goods produced
are earthenware of the ordinary class, chiefly for foreign markets.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Grosvenor Works_, Foley Place.--The works were established about
1850 by Messrs. Till, Bourne, & Browne, and since their time the
successive changes in the proprietorship have been Bourne & Browne;
Charles Browne, alone; Jackson & Browne; and Jackson & Gosling, by whom
they are now carried on, and who do a large home and foreign trade.
The manufactures are confined to china, in which tea, breakfast, and
dessert services are produced.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Park Works_, Market Street.--Mr. Ralph Malkin, doubtless a descendant
of the old pottery family of Malkin, manufactures here the ordinary
classes of earthenware goods.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Foley Pottery._--This is one of the oldest works in the district. It
was originally occupied by Samuel Spode, who lived in a large house
adjoining, which was pulled down some years ago. It was afterwards
occupied by Christopher Bourne. It has been in the possession of the
present occupiers (Messrs. W. Hawley & Co.) since 1842. The productions
are earthenware of the ordinary kind both for home and export markets.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Foley Potteries._--These potteries take their name from the Foley
family, who own property in the neighbourhood. They were built by Mr.
John Smith, of Fenton Hall, about 1820, the first firm by whom they
were worked being Messrs. Elkin, Knight, & Bridgwood (who made the
better classes of “Willow pattern,” “Broseley pattern,” and other
blue printed services). On the retirement of the latter the style was
changed to Knight & Elkin, and, subsequently, on the retirement of Mr.
Elkin, the works were carried on by Mr. John King Knight alone, till
1853, when he was joined in partnership by the late Mr. Henry Wileman,
wholesale china dealer, of London, the style being Knight & Wileman. On
the retirement of Mr. Knight, in 1856, Mr. Wileman carried on the works
alone until his death, in 1864, when his two sons succeeded him as J. &
C. Wileman. In 1866 the partnership was dissolved, and from that time
till the present the business has belonged to Mr. James F. Wileman,
the present proprietor. The goods produced are the usual granite ware,
printed wares, lustres, Egyptian and shining black, and cream-coloured
wares. All of these of the ordinary classes for household use, and the
great bulk of the trade are export to the States, Panama, Australia,
South Africa, Ceylon, Java, and India.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Foley China Works_ were built in 1860 by the late Mr. Henry
Wileman, the owner of the Foley Potteries. At his death, in 1864,
they were continued by his sons, Messrs. J. & C. Wileman, till 1867,
when the partnership was dissolved, the latter (Mr. C. J. Wileman)
continuing the china, and the former the earthenware works. In 1870 Mr.
C. J. Wileman retired, and his brother then became proprietor of both
manufactories, and shortly afterwards took into partnership Mr. J. B.
Shelley, the firm being styled Wileman & Co. The china produced is of
the ordinary useful class for household purposes.

       *       *       *       *       *

_King Street Works._--These works were established in the latter
part of last century by Mr. Shelley, who was succeeded by Mr. Marsh,
from whom they passed to Messrs. T. & J. Carey. The productions of
these firms were the ordinary Rockingham ware and common classes of
earthenware; Messrs. Carey also occupying two other manufactories
at Longton. They were next held by a company, and about 1850 passed
into the hands of the present proprietor, Mr. John Edwards. The goods
now produced are semi-porcelain and white granite for the American
markets. Until 1856 Mr. Edwards produced china in addition, but this
has since then been discontinued. Mr. Edwards is patentee of a process
for making thimble pins; and he also, in 1859, took out a patent for
“improvements in stacking or holding biscuit, earthen, china, and
glossed ware for firing” by means of “a ring frame or holder, with a
rim or flange projecting inwardly, so as to occupy the whole or part of
the centre of the ring.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_Heath._--Thomas Heath was a potter in Lane Delph in 1710, and produced
a good hard grey-coloured ware. His three daughters married three
potters, Palmer and Neale, of Hanley, and Pratt of Fenton. Heath was an
enterprising potter, and was successful in making the coated or delft
ware, same as made by Astbury.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Bacchus._--Thomas Bacchus, who, according to Shaw, married first
a widow named Astbury, manufactured cream-coloured and blue painted
ware; his second wife being a skilled painter, his late productions
were of a more superior character.

       *       *       *       *       *

_William Meir_ had pot works at Fenton in the middle of last century,
which he rented from Whieldon, as the following entry in his book
shows: “Mr. Wm. Meir, of Fenton Low, for a house and pottworks & 3
small closes, March 25, 1750, a year’s Rent due--£14--10--0.” Whieldon
at that time owned much land about Fenton, and Fenton Hall seems also
to have belonged to him. This he let to Ralph Woolf, at a yearly rental
of £4; the “New House in Lower Lane” being at the same time let to
Thos. Woolf for £2 2_s._ a year. Fenton Hall was afterwards, in 1750,
let at the same rent to Wm. Marsh and Wm. Kent; it was afterwards
divided.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Harrison._--George Harrison was an earthenware manufacturer in
the latter part of last century. His productions, according to an
invoice of August 20, 1793, consisted of “large and less tureens,”
“sauce tureens,” “root dishes,” “sallad bowls,” and “tureen ladles,”
blue edged; and cream-coloured “ewers.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_Martin._--Anne Martin (I presume, widow of S. Martin), was a
manufacturer at Lane Delph in 1793. Her productions, as appears from
invoices of hers of that year in my possession, were “variegated
jugs” of different sizes, “blue-gray mugs and jugs,” “hand-basins,”
different sizes, “egg cups,” “pattie pans,” “cups and saucers,” (these
were 10_d._ a dozen!) “sauce boats,” “bottles,” “bowls,” “cowlerd
toys,” “hand bowls,” “dip^d bosed jugs,” “sallad bowls,” “flower pots,”
“stoole pans,” “blue painted mugs and jugs,” “pickel jars,” “table
services,” &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Miles Mason_ was a manufacturer in the latter part of last century.
An invoice of his of 1797 enumerates blue dessert ware sets, each
consisting of “1 centre piece, 4 shells, 2 hearts, 2 cucum. tureens,
dishes & stands, and 24 desert plates;” “melon shapes,” “squares,”
oval and round baking dishes, oval and square salad dishes, “Nankeen
spitting pots,” basins and egg cups. Miles Mason was the father of
George Miles Mason, Charles James Mason, of “Ironstone china” celebrity
(see page 408), and William Mason. The family of Mason was originally
of Westmoreland, where they were tenants of Sir Michael Freeman, of
Rydal Hall. One of the sons went to London and established a shop for
the sale of East India china. He afterwards, I am informed, opened
a manufactory at Liverpool. He then bought land at Fenton from the
Bagnall family, on which he erected the works now occupied by Mrs.
Green, and called the “Minerva Works,” at Fenton. Afterwards he and his
brother built the “Fenton Pottery” (which see), and after some reverses
removed from it to a much smaller and less pretentious manufactory, the
“Daisy Bank Works” (which also see). Miles Mason’s marks were--

  [Illustration:

    [symbol] MILES MASON.   Miles Mason.    M. Mason.
    M. MASON.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Whieldon._--Thomas Whieldon, whose name is more intimately mixed up
with the early development of the potter’s art than that of almost any
other man, was a manufacturer at Little Fenton in the middle of last
century. Spode, Astbury, Garner, Greatbach, Heath, Edge, Marsh, and
many others, were his apprentices or employés, and Josiah Wedgwood,
when quite a young man, and Harrison, were his partners, while his
mottled and other wares were of high character. In 1740 Whieldon’s
works consisted of a small range of low thatched buildings. “His
early productions were knife-hafts for the Sheffield cutlers, and
snuff-boxes for the Birmingham hardwaremen to finish with hoops,
hinges, and springs, which himself usually carried in a basket to the
tradesmen, and, being much like agate, they were greatly in request.
He also made toys and chimney ornaments, coloured in either the clay
state or biscuit by zaffre, manganese, copper, &c., and glazed
with black, red, or white lead. He also made black glazed tea and
coffee-pots, tortoiseshell and melon table plates (with ornamented
edge and six scollops, as in the specimens kept by Andrew Boon, of the
Honeywall, Stoke), and other useful articles. Mr. A. Wood made models
and moulds of these articles; also pickle leaves, crab-stock handles,
and cabbage-leave spouts for tea and coffee-pots, which utensils, with
candlesticks, chocolate-cups, and tea-ware, were much improved, and
his connections extended subsequently, when Mr. J. Wedgwood became
Whieldon’s managing partner. He was a shrewd and careful person. To
prevent his productions being imitated in quality or shape, he always
buried the broken articles, and a few months ago we witnessed the
unexpected exposure of some of these, by some miners attempting to
get marl in the road at Little Fenton. The fortune he acquired by his
industry enabled him to erect a very elegant mansion near Stoke, where
he long enjoyed, in the bosom of his family, the fruits of his early
economy. He was also sheriff of the county in the twenty-sixth year of
the late reign. The benevolence of his disposition, and his integrity,
are honourable traits of character, far superior to the boast of
ancestry without personal merit. Mr. Whieldon lived, I am informed by
Mr. John Ward, in a large house near the lower part of Fenton, called
Whieldon’s Grove; the line of railway passes through the grounds, and a
part of the house is used by the railway company as a store. He died in
1798 at a very old age, and in 1828 his relict was interred beside him
in Stoke churchyard.

In 1749, Thomas Whieldon built an addition to his works, and the
account of the “Expenses of the new end & Seller of the Over
Work-house” are in my own possession.

From this period downwards for some years the dates and terms of
“hirings” of workpeople, “setting” of houses and land to different
tenants, and many other matters of interest, are all entered in his
own handwriting in a pocket account-book belonging to Whieldon, now in
my own possession. From this book I extract the following entries of
“hirings,” for the purpose of showing the small amount of wages paid in
those days as compared with the present, and the curious and amusing
bargains which were made between master and workman as to “earnest
money” and gifts of “old cloaths,” &c. The entries relating to Josiah
Spode and Robert Gardner I have already given in another part of this
volume:--

      1749.                                               _£ _s._ _d._

    Jany. 27.  Hired Jno. Austin for placeing white,
                  &c., pr. week                            0  5    6

               Pd. his whole earnest                       0  3    0

    Feby. 14.  Then hired Thos. Dutton                     0  6    6

               Pd. 1 pr. Stockins                          0  3    6

               Earnest for vineing[55]                     0 15    0

               1 pr. Stockins                              0  2    6

               Pd. in part                                 0  1    0

               Pd. do. in 7 yds. cloth                     0  8    9

       „  16.  Hired Wm. Keeling for handling              0  6    0

               Pd. his whole earnest                       0  1    0

       „  20.  Hired Wm. Cope for handleing & vineing
                 & cast ware, for                          0  7    0

               Pd. his whole earnest                       0 10    6

    March  8.  Then hired Jno. Barker for ye huvel,        0  5    6

               Pd. earnest in part                         0  1    0

               Pd. it to pay more                          0  1    0

       „  24.  Hired ... Low for making Slip               0  5    3

               Pd. him in part of his earnest              0  2    6

               To pay more                                 0  2    6

       „  26.  Then hired George Bagnall, for fireing
                  for this year, for                       0  5    3

               Full earnest, 5_s._

               Pd. in part, 2_s._ 6_d._

               Hired for 1750                              0  5    6

    June   2.  Hired Jos. Astbury                          0  1    6

               Pd. earnest                                 0  0    6

      1751.

    April  6.  Hired Thos. Astbury                         0  6    0

               Till Michaelmas, pd. earnest                0  1    0

    Oct.  26.  Then hired Cupit                            0  2    3

               Pd. earnest                                 0  0    6

               I am to give him a old pr. of stockings or
                 something.

      1752.

               Hired George Bagley for 2 years. 1st year   0  3    6

               2nd year                                    0  4    0

               To give him a pair of shoes each year.

      1753.

    June 21.   Hired Wm. Marsh for 3 years. He is to have
                 10_s_. 6_d_. earnest each year and 7_s_.
                 per week. I am to give an old coat or
                 something about 5_s._ value.

    Aug. 29.   Hired Westaby’s 3 children, per week        0  4    0

               Pd. earnest                                 0  0    6

               Hired John Everal, per week                 0  4    6

               Pd. earnest, 2 pr. Stockings                0  4    0

               1 shilling in cash                          0  1    0

               To have a handkerchief.

      1749.

    June  2.   Hired a boy of Ann Blowrs for Treading ye
                 lathe, per week                           0  2    0

               Pd. earnest                                 0  0    6

      1751.                                               _£ s. d._

    Jany. 11.  Then hired Elijah Simpson for Turning,
                 he is to have pr week                     0  8    0

               Whole earnest                               2  2    0

               Pd. in part                                 1  2    0

               Then hired Saml. Jackson for Throwing
                 Sagers and fireing pr. week               0  8    0

               Whole earnest                               2  2    0

               Pd. in part                                 1  2    0

               Pd. more                                    1  1    0

    Feby.  9.  Hired Jno. Edge, for per week               0  6    0

               He is to have earnest                       0  5    0

               & a new pr. stockins                        0  2    0

               Pd. in part                                 0  1    0

               Hired his son Saml for                      0  1    3

    April  6.  Hired Wm. Kent, per week                    0  7    6

               To give for earnest                         0 12    0

               Pd. in part                                 0  1    6

               To give a new Shirt at 16_d._ per yard.

               Hired Ann Blowrs Girl & Boy
                 Girl                                      0  0    9
                 Boy, Joseph                               0  2    0

              To give earnest, Testament.

The names of workpeople occurring in these hirings are:--

    Jno. Austin,
    Wm. Lawton,
    Robt. Gardner,
    George Bagnall,
    Siah Spoade,
    Jos. Matthewson,
    Jno. Everel,
    Wm. Sale,
    Wm. Ward,
    Thos. Halam,
    Daniel Greatbach,
    Richd. Bell,
    Wm. Marsh,
    Jno. Marsh,
    Jno. Barker,
    Henry Averills,
    Two lads,
    Thos. Barlow,
    Thos. Astbury,
    Sanders,
    Two lads,
    ---- Cupit,
    Uria Sutton,
    Benj. Burrows,
    Thos. Dutton,
    Thos. Mee,
    Jno. Kent,
    Wm. Kent,
    Bet. Blower,
    Ann Blowers,
    Boy and Girl,
    James Blower,
    John Blower,
    Ned Blower,
    Wm. Reeves,
    Old Thos. Mee,
    Wm. Keeling,
    Wm. Fox,
    John Lowe,
    Jos. Astbury,
    Thos. Steen,
    Elijah Simpson,
    John Knight,
    Thos. Bagley,
    George Bagley,
    ---- Booth,
    Westaby,
    Jno. Edge, Senr.,
    Wm. Cope,
    Jos. Botham,
    James Leigh,
    Saml. Jackson
    Thos. Hallins,
    Jno. Edge,
    Wm. Kent,
    Wm. Amery,
    Boy.

That Whieldon was a man of large property is evident from the entries
of “settings” of lands and houses, in the same book, but this is not
pertinent to my subject of the goods manufactured during the same
period. One or two entries give interesting particulars; thus:--

    To send Mrs. DAVISON.

    6 ½ pt. mugs, white, 2_d._
    1 flat candlestick, Tor.[56]

    Mr. THOS. FLETCHER, Dr.

                                    _£  s. d._
    To 1 doz. Plates, Tor.[56]        0  8  0
     „ 2 ¼ do. plate                 0  2  6
     „ 2 2 dishes                    0  2  0
     „ 1 do. painted                 0  2  0
     „ 1 do. Cream Colr.             0  1  8
     „ 5 pails                       0  2  6

    Mr. DAVISON.

    1 pail                           0  0  6

    To make for Mr. GREEN (of Hovingham,
    near Heylsham, Norfolk).

    4 Tor.[56] Teapots, all Toys; 4 Coffee Pots;
        4 Slop bowls;

    4 Ewers; 4 Sugar boxes, china make; 4 Mustard
        pots, high;

    8 Salts, high feet; 12 2 Dishes, Tor.[56]; 5 doz.
        pails;

    2 doz. piggins; 6 doz. large plates; 4 doz.
        round ditto;

    8 doz. a size less; 7 of ym round with Ribd.
        edge;

    1 do. Sqr.; 3 doz. Bread & butter plates,
        Ribd.; 3 qt. Coffee Pots;

    6 pints; 4 2nd size dishes; 2 larger.

  [Illustration: Figs. 640 to 644.]

The goods manufactured by Whieldon, both before, during, and after his
partnership with Wedgwood, were of good quality and excellent form.
They are now very scarce, and are highly and deservedly prized by
collectors. Two “tortoiseshell plates,” a small “cauliflower jug,” a
marbled, or “combed-pattern” plate, and an imitation agate knife-haft,
are shown by Figs. 640 to 644.

In 1754 Wedgwood and Harrison entered into partnership with Thomas
Whieldon. The partnership with Harrison, however, continued but for
a short period, and in 1752 he went out of the concern, Wedgwood and
Whieldon continuing in partnership five years, and carrying on their
trade at Whieldon’s works at Fenton Low. In 1754 Wedgwood here produced
his famous green glaze, which helped much to extend the fame of the
manufactory. In 1759 the partnership expired; Wedgwood returned to
Burslem, and Whieldon continued the business alone. He acquired a large
fortune, in 1786 was high sheriff of the county, and in 1798 died at an
advanced age.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Turner._--Messrs. William and John Turner, whose manufactory was
in the High Street, have often been referred to in this work. They
were among the best and most successful potters of the end of last and
early part of the present century. About 1756 Mr. John Turner and Mr.
Banks made white stone ware at Stoke, but in 1762 Turner removed to
Lane End, “where he manufactured every kind of pottery then in demand,
and also introduced some other kinds not previously known.” About 1780
he discovered a valuable vein of fine clay at Green Dock, from which
he “obtained all his supplies for manufacturing his beautiful and
excellent stone ware pottery of a cane colour, which he formed into
very beautiful jugs, with ornamental designs, and the most tasteful
articles of domestic use.” Turner produced “a shining blue glazed
pottery similar to that of the Japanese porcelain,” as well as making
many other improvements in the art. He died in 1786, and was succeeded
by his sons William and John Turner, who became, as just said, among
the best potters of the day--equalling in many respects Josiah Wedgwood
himself. In jasper ware, in Egyptian black, and other finer wares,
there is little choice between Turner and Wedgwood, although the
composition of the two bodies was not the same, and had been obtained
by different processes. In 1800 Messrs. Turner took out a patent
for a new method of manufacturing porcelain and earthenware by the
introduction of “Rafferness Mine Rock, Little Mine Rock, and New Rock.”
The works were closed about 1803. The mark used by the Turners was
simply the name TURNER, impressed on the jasper and other fine
bodies; on their blue-bordered and printed wares sometimes they used
the Prince of Wales’s feathers, with the name Turner beneath.

  [Illustration: TURNER. Fig. 645.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Garner._--Robert Garner, or Gardner, son of Robert Gardner, was an
apprentice with Thomas Whieldon, and afterwards employed by him, at
the same period as his fellow workman, Josiah Spode, was employed. The
following entry is in Whieldon’s own handwriting, in my possession:

                                                             _£  s. d._

    “1749. Feb. 28. Then hired Robt. Gardner, per week        0  6  6

                     Earnest                                  0 10  6

                     Pd. him toward it                        0  1  0

                     I am to make his earnest about 5s.
                       more in something.

     1751. Feby. 22. Agreed with Robt. Gardner for his
                       son for next year, pr. week            0  7  0

                     I am to give him earnest                 1  1  0

                     Paid it.

     1754. Novr. 11. Hired old Robt. Gardnr & pd. earnest     1  1  0

           March 16. Pd. Robt. Gardner, senr., earnest
                       for this year                          1  1  0

     1757.  May  30. Pd. earnest for this year                1  1  0”

Gardner was also a tenant of Whieldon’s, as shown by the following
entry:--

    “1752.  May 11. Let Robt. Gardner a house at Fenton
                      Hall Bank, pr. year                    £2  2  0”

This he continued to hold for some years, as receipts for rent show.

Robert Gardner, who was hired from his father in 1751, married Margaret
Astbury, daughter of Astbury, the well-known potter, and at one time
was in partnership with one of her brothers at the Foley. He built a
large house, then known as the Foley House, but latterly as the Bank
House. By his wife Margaret Astbury, Mr. Garner was the father of
Robert Garner, potter, of Lane End, some of whose accounts of 1797
are in my possession. He married a Miss Middlemore, daughter and
co-heiress of the Middlemores of Edgbaston and Studley, by whom, with
other issue, he had a son, the present Robert Garner, Esq., F.L.S.,
surgeon, of Stoke-upon-Trent, the author of the “Natural History of the
County of Stafford,” and other works, and one of the most talented and
enlightened of the worthies of the pottery district.

About 1750, it is said, the elder Robert Garner, in conjunction with
Messrs. Barker, “commenced the manufactory of Shining Black and White
Stone Ware, salt glaze, at the Row Houses, near the Foley, Fenton, and
where afterwards they made tolerable cream colour. They realised a good
property here, and Mr. R. Garner rented a manufactory and the best
mansion of the time in Lane End, near the old turnpike gate.” Robert
Garner, of Lane End, was a potter in a large way of business, and
excellent in Queen’s or cream-coloured ware. Some examples of his make
are preserved in the Stoke Museum. A sister of his married Mr. Banks,
formerly one of the principal potters of Stoke.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Edwards._--William Edwards, a potter at Lane Delph in 1750, made
a very superior kind of earthenware. One of his productions, described
by Shaw, was a plate with basket-work rim, the centre part divided into
compartments of embossed work, and decorated with various devices.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Johnson._--Thomas and Joseph Johnson made white stone, Crouch, and
other wares. Their manufactory was afterwards held by Mayer and Newbold.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Phillips._--About 1760, a son of Mr. Phillips, of Lane Delph,
commenced making white stone and other wares at Green Dock, Longton,
and afterwards produced cream-coloured ware of good quality.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Sampson Bridgwood._--His manufactory was erected in 1756 by Roger
Wood, of the Ash, and occupied by a Mr. Ford, for stone and brown wares.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Greatbach._--Robert Greatbach was bound apprentice with Thomas
Whieldon. He afterwards carried on business at Fenton, where he
produced a number of good and useful patterns in various wares. Thomas
Radford was associated with him in this business, and his engravings
were very popular. One of the best examples is a mug bearing “The World
in Planisphere,” on which occurs the name “engraved by Radford;” it is
very sharply and clearly engraved, and bears, on an heraldic wreath,
the initials “E. T.” Another celebrated production was the subject of
the “Prodigal Son” on tea-pots, &c. Greatbach was afterwards engaged by
Wedgwood, and was a successful modeller.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Greenwood._--A potter named Greenwood was in Fenton, in Staffordshire,
about 1770–80.

Other potters in Fenton were Thomas Heath, Bourne, Baker & Bourne,
Thos. Bacchus.

Other potters about 1760 were Phillips, Matthews, Moses Simpson, John
Adams, John Prince, and William Hilditch.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Heathcote & Co._--The Heathcotes were potters in Staffordshire, I
believe, at the close of last and in the early part of the present
century. The wares produced were good quality blue printed, painted,
and gilt services, and ornamental goods. The mark was the Prince of
Wales’s feathers with the name C. HEATHCOTE & CO. above, and on a
ribbon beneath the name of the pattern, as CAMBRIA, &c. Some good
examples are in the Mayer Museum.

  [Illustration: Fig. 646.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Matthews._--William Matthews, of Lane Delph, was a maker of
tortoiseshell and clouded pottery.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Myatt._--“At the southern extremity of Foley,” says Shaw in 1829, “are
the house and factory of the late Mr. Myatt, one of the first persons
who received the Wesleyan and Methodist preachers, and in whose parlour
the late Mr. J. Wesley stood, while from the window he preached to a
vast congregation, when last he passed through Staffordshire only a few
months prior to his decease.” He produced ordinary white and printed
earthenware and red ware.

His mark was his name, impressed:

    MYATT.

    MYATT.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Williamson._--Hugh Williamson was a potter in the latter part of
last century, and principally made the ordinary blue printed ware. A
plate or tray with blue flowers and border is in the Mayer collection,
and is labelled as “Made at Hugh Williamson’s. It was transferred by
Mrs. Hancock, seventy-eight years of age, when she was an apprentice.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_Harley._--Thomas Harley, a manufacturer at “Lane End,” produced some
good earthenware services, jugs, and other articles. He sometimes
marked with his name in full in writing letters, _T. Harley, Laneend_,
and at other times HARLEY.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Plant._--Benjamin Plant was a potter here at the close of last
century. His name sometimes occurs as below.

    _B. Plant,
    Lane End._

    _Benjamin Plant,
    Lane End._

       *       *       *       *       *

_Bailey & Batkin._--This firm (see Batkin & Booth, page 403) made
a fine quality of lustre ware--a brown clay with lustre wash all over
outside, and often inside. In the Mayer collection is a service of it,
and one large piece with “BAILEY & BATKIN, SOLE PATENTEES,”
running round a central band.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Mayer & Newbold._--This firm produced excellent goods in the early
part of the present century. One of their marks was--_May^r & Newb^d_,
and another Mayer & Newbold in full.

       *       *       *       *       *

It will be interesting to add that at Longton Hall William Littler,
of Brownhills, at one time resided, and there, according to Shaw,
“continued his experiments [in the manufacture of porcelain] until
his success surpassed all the expectations of his contemporaries; but
there not being much demand for this kind of ware he sacrificed his
estate at Brownhills, near Burslem, and then discontinued manufacturing
porcelain. His chief workman was not only a good practical potter, but
a tolerable modeller, Dr. Mills, who subsequently died at Shelton at a
very advanced age.” Littler’s removal to Longton Hall is said to have
been “about 1765.” Littler is said afterwards to have been manager of
Baddeley & Fletcher’s works at Shelton. Ten years previously William
Duesbury, the founder of the Derby China Works, was also of Longton
Hall. In a deed of that year, which I have given in _extenso_ on
page 66, he is described as “William Duesbury, of Longton Hall, in the
parish of Stoke-upon-Trent,” and in another deed as “Wm. Duesbury,
of Longton, in ye County of Stafford, Enamellor” (see under “Derby,”
_ante_).




                              CHAPTER X.

   Tunstall--Early Potters--Enoch Booth--Child--Winter--Unicorn
   and Pinnox Works--Greenfield Works--Newfield Works--George
   Street Pottery--Phœnix Works--Sandyford--Lion
   Works--Victoria Works--Swan Bank Works--Church Bank
   Works--Well Street Works--Old Works--Black Bank--High Street
   Works--Woodland Pottery--Greengate Pottery--Sandyford
   Works--Tunstall Works--Highgate Pottery--Clay Hill
   Pottery--Royal Albert Works--Soho Works--Marshall &
   Co.--Walton--Stevenson--Birch--Eastwood--Shorthose &
   Co.--Heath & Son--Newcastle-under-Lyme--Tobacco-pipes--Charles
   Riggs--Garden Edgings--Thomas Wood--Terra-cotta
   Works--Armitage--Lichfield--Penkhull, &c. &c.


The Tunstall potters enumerated by Shaw in 1829 are: John Mear, T.
Goodfellow, Ralph Hall, S. & J. Rathbone, J. Boden, Bourne, Nixon &
Co., Breeze & Co., and Burrows & Co. Ward in 1842 enumerates seventeen
manufactories at Tunstall; these were as under. China and earthenware,
three, viz.: Hancock & Wright, Bill & Proctor, and Rathbone & Brummitt.
Earthenware only, twelve, viz.: Wood & Challinor, Thos. Goodfellow,
John Meir & Son, Joseph Heath & Co., Hall & Holland, Wm. Adams, Jun.,
& Co. (Greenfield), Podmore, Walker & Co. (two manufactories), James
Beech (two), Thos. Bowley, and Mayer & Mawdesley. China toys and black
ware, two, viz.: Michael Tunnicliffe and John Harrison. Mr. Abraham
Lowndes was also a manufacturer here. Messrs. James Beech & Abraham
Lowndes had a manufactory here in 1829.

In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries the common coarse brown
ware of the period was made at Golden Hill, near Tunstall, and later
on the ordinary “brown chequered and Porto Bello wares were made.” In
the beginning of this century there was a small establishment for the
manufacture of cream colour and porcelain, but it is now (says Shaw in
1829) discontinued, and the building is converted into dwelling-houses.
At Green Lane, Golden Hill, coarse black and brown ware was formerly
made.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Enoch Booth._--This potter established a manufactory at Cliff
Bank, Tunstall, and about 1750 commenced making cream-coloured ware
of a superior kind, “which was coated with a glaze of lead ore and
ground flint.” He married Ann, one of the daughters of Thomas Child,
of Tunstall, on a part of whose property he settled and commenced his
works. By this marriage he had, with other issue, a daughter Ann, who
married Anthony Keeling, by whom he was succeeded in business. The
works were afterwards carried on by Mr. T. Goodfellow. Keeling about
1793 built a large residence adjoining his works, and in 1810 retired
from business; he died at Liverpool in 1866 (see Phœnix Works).

       *       *       *       *       *

_Child._--About 1763 Mr. Smith Child established a pottery here, which
was afterwards carried on by Mr. Clive. It was subsequently occupied by
Messrs. Joseph Heath & Co., Mr. Anthony Shaw, and the Messrs. Adams.
Some examples are known which bear the impressed name CHILD (see
Newfield Works).

       *       *       *       *       *

_Winter._--“Early in the present century,” says Shaw, “Captain Winter
having boasted that the articles of his manufacture at Tunstall were
the only true porcelain made in Staffordshire, experienced no little
chagrin on ascertaining that his ware would fuse at a heat much below
that usually required,” &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Unicorn Pottery_ and _Pinnox Works_.--These large and important
manufactories, situated in Amicable Street and Great Woodland Street,
for the production of general earthenware, early in the present century
were occupied by Mr. E. Challinor, who was succeeded in 1825 by Messrs.
G. Podmore Walker & Co., who also occupied the Swan Bank Pottery. That
firm was succeeded by the present proprietors, “Messrs. E. Wedgwood &
Co.,” the head of the firm being Enoch Wedgwood, Esq., of Port Hill,
J.P. for the county of Stafford, whose elder son, Edmund M. Wedgwood,
is also a partner. The works are of large extent, and give employment
to six or seven hundred persons; they occupy an area of about an acre
of ground, and are among the most substantially built and best arranged
in the pottery district. The goods produced are the higher classes of
earthenware. In these, dinner, tea, breakfast, dessert, toilet and
other services, and all the usual miscellaneous articles, are made to
a very considerable extent, both for the home, colonial, continental,
and American markets, to which considerable quantities are regularly
exported. The quality of the “Imperial Ironstone China”--the staple
production of the firm--is of remarkable excellence, both in body and
in glaze, and the decorations are characterized by pure taste, artistic
feeling, and precision of execution; they consist of an endless variety
of admirable patterns, printed in various colours, wholly or partially
hand-painted, enamelled, and gilt. The great and laudable aim of the
present firm has been and is to produce the best, most artistic, and
most pleasingly effective designs, and to adapt them to ordinary
purposes, so that they may become the every-day surroundings of the
artisan as well as of the educated man of taste. Thus they associate
durability of quality in body and a perfect glaze with purity of
outline in form, chasteness of decoration, and clearness and harmony of
colour--adapting their designs and styles of decoration to the national
tastes of the people in the various climes to which the goods are sent.
One of the most successful of their ordinary printed designs is the
pattern known as “Asiatic Pheasants,” which has become so popular as
to be considered one of the standard patterns of this country and the
colonies. Other equally effective designs have also been introduced by
Mr. Wedgwood with great success.

In the higher classes of decoration--painting, jewelling, and
gilding--the productions of this firm also rank deservedly high, and
they are particularly successful in services bearing monograms and
armorial decorations.

Besides the usual classes of useful and ornamental earthenware in
services, &c., E. Wedgwood & Co. produce beautiful specimens of inlaid
decorations for hall stairs, and elaborately carved furniture, which
may hereafter be in general repute.

They have not made a public display of their distinct manufacture,
except at the Paris Exhibition, where they were awarded a medal for the
excellence of their earthenware. The marks used by the firm are the
following, impressed in the body of the ware:

  [Illustration: STONE CHINA

  WEDGWOOD & CO

  Fig. 647.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Greenfield Works (William & Thomas Adams)._--This business was
originally established at Stoke by the grandfather of the present
owner, William Adams, who then carried on the business in his own
name until 1829, when the firm was changed to Wm. Adams & Sons; the
second William Adams being head of the firm. In 1834 the business
was considerably enlarged, and the present works at Greenfield,
Tunstall, opened. In 1853 a dissolution of the firm took place, and
the Greenfield works were carried on by William Adams (the second)
until 1865, when he retired in favour of his sons, William and Thomas
Adams, the present owners of the manufactory. The trade of this large
and important manufactory is entirely confined to foreign markets,
the principal trade being done with the Brazils, Cuba, Central
America, Java, Manilla, Singapore, the United States, &c., the first
six of which are the special trade of this firm. The quality of the
earthenware is the best of its class, and is noted in the markets
for which it is specially prepared for its durability, its “pleasant
handling,” and the richness and variety of its coloured and sponged
patterns, the bright fancy character of which is much admired in the
out markets of the world which have been named. The goods produced are
tea, toilet, and table services, besides a variety of other articles;
and these are all the best of their class, both in body, in form, and
in decoration. White granite (or ironstone china) of an excellent
quality is also made for the American and other markets, some of the
raised patterns--as, for instance, the “Dover”--being remarkably good,
and the forms of the pieces--side-dishes with covers, &c.--being
faultless. Transfer printing is much used, and is by this firm
judiciously combined with “sponged” patterns with good effect.

William Adams was an apprentice to Josiah Wedgwood, and was a great
favourite with him. He commenced business for himself at Tunstall, and
there produced some fine works of art in jasper and other wares. He
died quite in the beginning of the present century, and was, I have
heard, succeeded in the Tunstall business by his son Benjamin Adams.
Occasionally the name ADAMS, or W. ADAMS & SON, is met with.

“About 1800,” according to Shaw, “Mr. Benjamin Adams, of Tunstall, was
successful in the manufacture of jasper” in imitation of, though not
equal to, that of Wedgwood.

_Newfield Works._--These were occupied in 1857 by the father of the
members of the firm whose works have just been spoken of, and are now
carried on by Mr. William Adams. The goods are of a similar excellent
character and are produced for the same markets, with the addition of
Australia and Cape of Good Hope. An extensive business is done with the
United States, especially in Philadelphia and Baltimore (see Child).

       *       *       *       *       *

_George Street Pottery_, established 1862.--At these works Mr. W.
Holdcroft (formerly Holdcroft & Wood) manufactures all kinds of
earthenware dinner, toilet, tea, and other services, and the usual
varieties of useful articles. Jugs are produced in immense quantities
and of great variety, both in form and in styles of ornamentation,
as is also every variety of goods. Even in the commoner classes a
better style of decoration is observable in the productions of this
manufactory than in many others. The styles of ornamentation are hand
painting, transfer printing, ground colours, lustre-glazes, &c. The
markets produced for are both home and foreign, and the general classes
of goods are what may be called generally commercial. Connected with
these works is the highly interesting fact that Mr. Holdcroft was
the first to introduce the down-draught system of firing into the
potteries, which has effected a great saving in fuel and a freedom from
smoke. Mr. Wood was great-nephew of one of the most celebrated men of
the district--the late Enoch Wood--and is now a partner in the firm of
Poole, Stanway, & Wood, of Stoke.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Phœnix Works._--These works were built in the last century by
Anthony Keeling, one of the eminent potters of the district in the
“olden days,” and of whom a notice has already been given (page 424).
He married Ann Booth, daughter of the celebrated Enoch Booth, to whose
business he succeeded. At the commencement of the present century he
was the principal manufacturer in Tunstall, but was unsuccessful and
retired on a small independence in 1810. He was succeeded by Mr. Thomas
Goodfellow, who made considerable additions to the establishment. They
afterwards passed into the hands of Mr. Bridgwood, by whom (being,
later on, joined in partnership by Mr. Edward Clarke) they were carried
on under the style of “Bridgwood & Clarke.” Mr. Bridgwood dying in
1864, Mr. Clarke, whose large practical experience had added much to
the already extensive transactions of the establishment, became sole
proprietor, and carried on the concern until 1877, when he removed
to the New Bridge Works at Longport, which see. Mr. Clarke produced
“white granite” (_porcelain opaque_) in immense quantities and of
the very best quality, for the American markets, where it successfully
competed with “French porcelain;” artists’ palettes, tiles, slabs,
saucers, &c., were also made in large quantities, and possessing all
the requirements of hardness, evenness, and durability of glaze, are
much esteemed. Finger plates and door furniture of every variety, both
in black in white and in ivory coloured body, and plain or variously
decorated, were also produced in large quantities. In ivory body, in
white, and in brown, Mr. Clarke manufactured, very largely, castor
bowls, which are used on legs of tables, chairs, sofas, &c., and on
other varieties of furniture which require constant moving. Mr. Clarke
also for many years carried on the “Churchyard Works” at Burslem,
of which a lengthy notice is given on page 244. The marks used were
EDWARD CLARKE, impressed on the body of the ware, and the
royal arms, with supporters, garter, motto, &c., above a flowing ribbon
on which are the words “EDWARD CLARKE, PORCELAIN OPAQUE,” and,
beneath, TUNSTALL (see Enoch Booth).

       *       *       *       *       *

_Lion Works_, Sandyford.--These works were commenced for goods for the
home trade by James Beech in 1838, and afterwards passed into the hands
of Thomas Walker, who made South American goods, and next, in 1856,
to Broughton & Mayer, whose productions were for the United States.
In 1862 the present firm, “Ford & Challinor,” became proprietors, and
have continued the manufacture of general earthenware for the home and
foreign markets.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Victoria Works._--Established and built by Mr. John Tomkinson in 1858,
and carried on by him and Mr. G. W. Turner under the style of “Turner &
Tomkinson” until 1873, when Mr. Tomkinson retired. The business is now
carried on by Mr. Turner and his sons, under the style of “G. W. Turner
& Sons.” The goods produced are the ordinary printed and enamelled
earthenware in dinner, toilet and other services, &c., for the home and
colonial markets. The mark used is simply the initials of the firm.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Swan Bank Works._--This is one of the oldest manufactories in
Tunstall. In the beginning of the present century it belonged to
and was worked by Mr. Ralph Hall, and is still the property of his
descendants, his sole executor being Mr. Frederick J. Bowers, by whom
(as successor to his father, Mr. George F. Bowers) the Brownhills
Pottery was carried on until that concern was formed into a company
(see page 288). Mr. Ralph Hall was succeeded in the manufactory by
Messrs. Podmore Walker & Co., by whom it was carried on until about
1862, when it passed into the hands of Messrs. Beech & Hancock, by whom
it was much improved, and from them to its present occupier, James
Beech.

The productions of the firm are the ordinary classes of earthenware and
stoneware for the home trade. In these wares dinner, tea, toilet, and
all the usual services are largely produced in every variety of style
and of various degrees of ornamentation, both in “sponged,” printed,
painted, enamelled, gilt and lustred styles. Stoneware jugs and other
articles are also largely made and are of excellent quality, as are
also black ware and other jardinières flower vases, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Church Bank Works._--The Church Bank Works were built in 1842 by
Mr. Robert Beswick (of Chell, the present owner), by whom they were
carried on till 1860, and afterwards successively by the firms of Beech
& Hancock, Eardley & Hammersley, and Ralph Hammersley alone. In 1870
the manufactory passed into the hands of its present occupiers, Messrs.
Thomas Booth & Son. The firm commenced business in 1864 at the Knowles
Works, Burslem, under the style of Evans & Booth, which in 1868 was
altered to Thomas Booth & Co. In 1872 the style was changed to its
present form of Thomas Booth & Son. The productions are earthenware
of medium quality in which all the usual services and other domestic
articles are produced for the home and colonial markets.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Well Street Pottery_, called also the _Old Works_.--These works--of
old foundation--are carried on by Mr. Stephen Clive under the style
of Stephen Clive & Co., whose productions are the ordinary middle
classes of earthenware goods for the home and foreign markets. The
firm was formerly Clive & Lloyd, and after Mr. Lloyd retired became
Stephen Clive & Co. “About 1802 Mr. William Brookes, engraver, then of
Tunstall, afterwards of Burslem, suggested to Mr. J. Clive a new method
of ornamenting by blue-printing. The border of the plate was engraved
from a beautiful strip of border for paper-hangings of rooms, and many
of the manufacturers approved of the alteration. The New Hall Company
instantly adopted it for some of their tea-services.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_Black Bank and High Street Works._--These works are carried on by
Mr. Ralph Hammersley; the latter for the production of ordinary
earthenware, and the former for common jet, red, and Rockingham ware
articles.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Woodland Pottery._--Messrs. Hollinshed & Kirkham, formerly Edmund
T. Wood, is situated in Woodland Street. Earthenware for the home and
foreign markets is produced in all the usual varieties.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Greengate Pottery._--Messrs. Henry Meir & Son manufacture earthenware
in all the usual services of the more ordinary classes.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Sandyford Works._--Ordinary earthenware is here made by Mr. Jabez
Blackhurst.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Tunstall Works._--Messrs. Blackhurst & Dunning commenced these works
in 1857 for the manufacture of ordinary earthenware for the home and
South American markets. In 1867 Mr. Dunning died, and since then the
business was carried on by Mr. Richard Blackhurst alone; he died in
1877.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Highgate Pottery._--Established by George Hood, who purchased the
land from Mr. Randle-Wilkinson in 1831, and built the manufactory. The
works were purchased by Mr. William Emberton in July, 1846, and carried
on by him until his death in 1867, since which time they have been
carried on by his two sons, Thomas Isaac Emberton and James Emberton,
the present owners. The goods manufactured are all the usual varieties
of earthenware for the home markets, and the firm are also large
producers of special goods for Ceylon, Calcutta, Bombay, and other
Indian markets.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Clay Hill Pottery._--Messrs. Thomas Elsmore & Son manufacture ordinary
earthenware.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Royal Albert Works._--Mr. Albert Meakin produces the ordinary classes
of earthenware goods.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Soho Works._--Mr. George Guest here manufactures common earthenware.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Illustration: Fig. 648.]

_Marshall & Co._--This firm were manufacturers in the early part of
this century, but their locality is unknown to me with certainty. The
mark, Fig. 648, occurs in the Mayer Museum. It is impressed on the
bottom of a shell-piece, a part of a dessert service, painted in pink
waves with gilt edge. It is a very good design, and in painting and
gilding excellent.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Walton._--The name WALTON in a scroll, and also “Walton” alone, occur
impressed in the ware of common earthenware statuettes.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Stevenson._--There were more than one firm of potters named Stevenson
in Staffordshire. Some were of Cobridge. One potter of that name used a
vesica-shaped mark bearing a three-masted ship with the name Stevenson
above it impressed in the ware. Another used the mark of a crown within
a circle, bearing the words A. STEVENSON, WARRANTED, STAFFORDSHIRE,
impressed in the ware. Another mark was simply the name STEVENSON, also
impressed.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Birch._--Mr. Birch produced Egyptian black ware articles of good
quality. His mark was the name BIRCH, impressed in the ware.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Eastwood._--Red ware, cane-coloured ware, with raised foliage,
flowers, figures, &c., and black ware tea-pots, were made by Eastwood,
and bear his name impressed in the body of the ware, EASTWOOD or
Eastwood.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Shorthose & Co._--I have met with the marks of SHORTHOSE & CO.,
SHORTHOSE, Shorthose & Co., Shorthose, on a variety of wares, including
ordinary cream-coloured services, white and printed goods, and Egyptian
black and other articles. My late friend, Mr. Bagshawe, owned some good
examples; he considered the works to have closed about 1820.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Heath & Son._--The two impressed marks here engraved, Figs. 649
and 650, are supposed to be those of Messrs. Heath & Son. They occur on
well-decorated earthenware services of average quality.

  [Illustration: Figs. 649 and 650.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 651 and 652.]


                         NEWCASTLE-UNDER-LYME.

_Charles Riggs’s Tobacco-pipes._--Two hundred years ago, when Plot
wrote, there was a famous manufactory of tobacco-pipes at this place.
The maker was Charles Riggs, and he made “very good pipes of three
sorts of clay.” Plot says (1676), “As for _Tobacco-pipe clays_ they
are found all over the county, near Wrottesley House, and Stile Cop,
in Cannock Wood, whereof they make pipes at Armitage and Lichfield,
both which, though they are _greyish clays_, yet burn very white. There
is _Tobacco-pipe clay_ also found at Darlaston, near Wednesbury; but
of late disused, because of better and cheaper found in Monway-field,
betwixt Wednesbury and Willingsworth, which is of a _whitish_ colour,
and makes excellent _pipes_, as doth also another of the same colour
dug near the Salt Water poole in Pensnet Chase, about a mile and a half
south of Dudley. And _Charles Riggs_, of Newcastle, makes very good
_pipes_ of three sorts of clay--a _white_ and _blew_--which he has
from between Shelton and Hanley Green, whereof the blew clay burns the
_whitest_, but not so _full_ as the _white_, _i.e._, it _shrinks_ more;
but the best sort he has is from Grubbers Ash, being _whitish_ mixt
with _yellow_. It is a short britle sort of clay, but burns full and
white; yet he sometimes mixes it with the blew before mentioned.”

With reference to this Charles Riggs, pipe maker, of
Newcastle-under-Lyme, it is interesting to add that nearly a hundred
pipes, each bearing, as a heel or other mark, the initials C R
in various forms--found at Newcastle and other localities in the
district--have come under my notice, and are, there can be but little
doubt, examples of his workmanship. They are interesting too as showing
the transition in the lifetime of one maker from the flat heel to the
pointed spur. Two of these are engraved on page 432 (Figs. 651, 652).
The first has a stamp on the heel bearing the initials C R between two
crescents, one above, the other below. The second, being a pipe with
pointed spur, has the stamp on the front of the bowl so as to face the
smoker; it bears the same mark of initials C R (Charles Riggs?) and
crescents. Another mark of Riggs was simply the initials C R as shown
on the same group.


                         NEWCASTLE-UNDER-LYME.

_Thomas Wood’s Garden Edgings._--Tiles for garden edgings were in
Plot’s time made at Newcastle-under-Lyme, and must have had extensive
sale, as the gardens of the better kind were in those days always laid
out in “Knots” of more or less elaborate design. Plot, speaking of this
branch of manufacture, says: “Also at Newcastle-under-Lyme the _Tiles_
burnt in a _Kill_, the usual way, being found not to last, one _Mr.
Thomas Wood_, of the same Towne, first contrived to burn them (which we
may look upon as an art relating to fire) in a _Potter’s Oven_, wherein
he made them so good and lasting, that notwithstanding they have been
put to the hardship of dividing the parts of _Garden Knots_, to endure
not only the perpetual moisture of the earth, but frost, snow, and all
sorts of weather; yet they few of them decay, scarce 5 tiles in 500
having failed in 20 yeares time; so that now he has been followed by
all the countrey thereabout.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_Newcastle Pottery._--This manufactory was established by Messrs.
Harrison & Baker in 1866, for the production of red ware, ebony or jet
ware, and terra cotta, as well as ordinary horticultural goods. In red
and jet wares the usual useful and ornamental classes of articles are
made, and are of average quality. Rockingham ware is also somewhat
largely made.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Keys and Mountford._--In the Exhibition of 1851 Messrs. Keys and
Mountford exhibited, and received honourable mention for parian
statuettes.


                               ARMITAGE.

In 1676, when Plot wrote, there was a manufactory of pipes at this
place. They were made from the native greyish clay of the district,
which burned very white.


                              LICHFIELD.

The manufactory of pipes from the native clays of Cannock Wood and
other places in the county, which, though naturally grey, burned very
white, is mentioned by Plot in 1676.


                               PENKHULL.

In 1600, it is stated by Shaw, there “were three manufactories for
coarse brown pottery” at Penkhull, “one of which belonged to Mr. Thomas
Doody, whose descendants now reside at Tunstall.”




                              CHAPTER XI.

   Swansea--Cambrian Pottery--Dillwyn’s Etruscan Ware--Swansea
   China--Glamorgan Pottery--Richard’s Pottery--Landore
   Pottery--Llanelly--South Wales Pottery--Ynisymudw--Terra
   Cotta Works--Nantgarw--Billingsley--Nantgarw
   China--Brown and Stoneware Potteries--Cardigan--Cardigan
   Potteries--Hereford--Lugwardine Tile Works--Torquay--Terra
   Cotta Works--Alderholt--Smethwick--Reading--Coley Avenue
   Works--Wakefield Moor--Houghton’s Table of Clays--Ditchling
   Pottery, &c.--Amblecote--Leicester--Spinney Hill
   Works--Wednesbury--Winchester--Aylsford--Exeter--Lincoln.


                               SWANSEA.

_Cambrian Pottery._--A small manufactory of earthenware appears to
have existed at Swansea in the middle of last century, at which time
the works had come into the hands of, and belonged to, a Mr. Coles, who
afterwards took into partnership a Mr. George Haynes. The buildings
were originally copper-works, and were converted into a pottery. In
February, 1783, the works were offered for sale, as will be seen by the
following highly interesting advertisement, which I now, for the first
time, reprint. It shows the importance and extent of the works at that
time.


                          “POTTERY AND MILLS.

   “To be SOLD, A very capital SET of WORKS, well calculated for
   the POTTERY, GLASS, or any other Business, wherein well
   constructed Cones are necessary.

   “These Works have been built within these few Years, and have
   been employed in a very extensive Pottery and Earthenware
   Manufacture. They are situated at Swansea, in Glamorganshire
   (the most flourishing Port in that Part of this Island), and
   have every Convenience for carrying on the present or any other
   similar Business. Coals of a most excellent Quality are brought
   into the Works for less than 5s. per Ton; Teignmouth Clay for
   12s. per Ton; and Flints for 20s. per Ton; and may be landed at
   the Door of the Works, from Vessels of 300 Tons.

   “The Country being full of excellent Coals, and there being
   several considerable Manufactures of Copper, Lead, Tin, &c. on
   the River, the Port of Swansea is resorted to by great Numbers
   of Ships from the West of England, Ireland, Holland, France,
   Spain, Portugal, Sweden, and Norway, by which Means advantageous
   Connexions are already formed and may be easily extended. The
   Country is very populous, Provisions in great plenty, and Labour
   very cheap.

   “There are two excellent Water Mills included in the Premises,
   for grinding the Flints, one of which is more than sufficient
   for the Works; the other may be very advantageously altered to
   a Grist-Mill, not being above a Quarter of a Mile from Swansea;
   and at present the Inhabitants of that populous Town are under
   the Necessity of sending their Corn above three Miles to be
   ground.

   “The Purchaser may be accommodated with a very good
   Dwelling-House, Gardens, Stable, and some Pasture Ground, close
   to the Works.

   “The present Proprietor accidentally became possessed of the
   Works, and is settled in a very different Way of Business, at a
   100 Miles distance; which is the Reason of the Premises being
   disposed of.

   “Further Particulars may be had by applying to Mr. John Miers,
   Merchant, in London; Messrs. J. and W. Cave, Merchants, in
   Bristol; Mr. Edward Coles, on the Premises; or Mr. John Coles,
   at the Iron Warehouse, Glocester.”

Later on, probably after the sale, Mr. Haynes became sole proprietor,
and by him and his partners, under the firm of “Haynes & Co.,” the
works were much enlarged, and were by them styled the “Cambrian
Pottery.”

In the year 1800, when Donovan wrote his excursions in South Wales and
Monmouthshire, the works, then carried on by G. Haynes & Co., of which
he gives an extended account, were considered to be extensive, and to
be producing wares of a superior class; the buildings being said to
be arranged on the same plan as those of Josiah Wedgwood, at Etruria.
In 1802 Mr. Haynes sold his works, moulds, models, stock, &c., to
Mr. Lewis Weston Dillwyn, and by him the buildings were very greatly
enlarged, and the business considerably extended.

At first, only the ordinary descriptions of common earthenware were
made at these works; but the manufacture was gradually improved by Mr.
Haynes, who produced a fine white earthenware, a cream-coloured ware,
an “opaque china,” and other varieties, as well as a very passable
kind of biscuit ware. This “opaque china,” a fine, hard, compact, and
beautiful body, is doubtless the “porcelain” ware spoken of by Donovan,
on which so much unnecessary stress was laid by a recent writer in
attempting to prove that veritable porcelain was made at Swansea before
the time when Mr. Dillwyn commenced it; the same writer forgetting
to notice that in the same paragraph in which Donovan speaks of the
Swansea “_porcelain_” he speaks also of it and other wares bidding
fair some day to vie with “Sieve _pottery_.”

In 1790, one of the “throwers” was Charles Stevens, who had been an
apprentice (at the same time as William Taylor) at the Worcester China
Works. In that year he applied to be employed at the Derby China Works,
sending as his address “The Pot Work, Swansea,” and next “at Mr.
Bothwell’s, engraver, in the Strand, Swansea.”

In the body of the Swansea wares, “the North Devon or Bideford clays
seem to have been early employed; as also the Dorset or Poole clays,
the last still continuing to be used. Cornish Kaolin and China stone
likewise formed a portion of the porcelain body.”

Upon the works passing into the hands of Mr. Lewis Weston Dillwyn, in
1802, the opaque china was much improved, and the decorations assumed
a much more artistic character. Mr. Lewis Weston Dillwyn, who was a
Fellow of the Linnæan Society, was the author of “A Synopsis of British
Confervæ, Coloured from Nature, with Descriptions;” “A Description of
Recent Shells;” and “Catalogue of the more rare Plants found in the
neighbourhood of Dover;” and, in conjunction with Dawson Turner, of
“The Botanist’s Guide through England and Wales.”

  [Illustration: Fig. 653.]

The principal painter employed for the decoration of this ware appears
to have been a Mr. W. W. Young, an artist of great ability, who was
particularly skilful in painting flowers, but more especially natural
history subjects--birds, butterflies and other insects, and shells.
These he drew from nature, and was remarkably truthful and free in
his delineations. Pieces decorated with his painting are now of rare
occurrence, especially those with his name signed upon them. When
it does appear, it is, so far as my knowledge goes, either _Young
pinxit_, or _Young f_. In the Museum of Practical Geology
are some interesting examples of this “opaque china,” or “_opaque
porcelain_.” The decorations consisted--we are told by Donovan--in
1800, of “emblematical designs, landscapes, fruit, flowers, heraldic
figures, or any other species of ornamental devices,” so that several
artists must at that time have been employed. Mr. Young, of whom I
have just spoken, had been for some time previously employed by Mr.
Dillwyn in illustrating his works on Natural History; and having been
instructed in the use of enamel colours, he proved a great acquisition
to the manufactory. He afterwards became one of the proprietors of
the Nantgarw China Works, as I shall show in my account of that
manufactory.

In 1814 Mr. Dillwyn received a communication from Sir Joseph Banks,
that a specimen of china had been submitted to Government from
Nantgarw, and he was requested to examine and report on those works.
This matter is thus spoken of by Mr. Dillwyn himself: “My friend Sir
Joseph Banks informed me that two persons, named Walker and Beeley,[57]
had sent to Government, from a small manufactory at Nantgarw (ten or
twelve miles north of Cardiff), a specimen of beautiful china, with
a petition for their patronage; and that, as one of the Board of
Trade, he requested me to examine and report upon the manufactory.
Upon witnessing the firing of a kiln at Nantgarw, I found much reason
for considering that the body used was too nearly allied to glass
to bear the necessary heat, and observed that nine-tenths of the
articles were either shivered, or more or less injured in shape, by
the firing. The parties, however, succeeded in making me believe that
the defects in their porcelain arose entirely from imperfections in
their small trial-kiln; and I agreed with them for a removal to the
Cambrian Pottery, at which two new kilns, under their direction, were
prepared. While endeavouring to strengthen and improve this beautiful
body, I was surprised at receiving a notice from Messrs. Flight &
Barr, of Worcester, charging the parties calling themselves Walker and
Beeley with having clandestinely left an engagement at their works,
and forbidding me to employ them.” In 1814, then, William Billingsley
and George Walker commenced for Mr. Dillwyn, at the Cambrian Pottery,
Swansea, the manufacture of china, of the same body and glaze as that
they had produced at Nantgarw.

For this purpose some new buildings, kilns, &c., were erected, and the
utmost secrecy was observed. The new buildings for the manufacture
of china were erected on a place previously a bathing-place. Mr.
Dillwyn--or rather Billingsley and Walker for him--succeeded in
producing a beautiful china; but the loss of time in building and
altering the kilns, &c., and the losses and disappointments attending
numerous experiments and trials, prevented it being made to more than
a limited extent. Soon after the receipt of Messrs. Flight & Barr’s
letter, Mr. Dillwyn dismissed Billingsley and Walker (who returned to
Nantgarw), and continued the manufacture of china, but of a somewhat
different body. About 1817 the manufacture was laid aside by Mr.
Dillwyn, and for a time carried on by Mr. Bevington. In 1823, the
moulds, &c., were purchased by Mr. Rose, of the Coalport Works, and
removed to that place; and since that time no china has been made at
Swansea.

The Cambrian Pottery passed successively from Mr. Lewis Weston Dillwyn
(who afterwards became, from 1832 till 1835, Member of Parliament for
Glamorganshire) to Mr. Bevington, who, I am informed, was at one time
manager of the works, and who subsequently took a partner, and carried
them on under the style of “Bevington & Roby,” and “Bevington, Roby,
& Co.,” and so back again, ultimately to Mr. Dillwyn, and thence to
his son, Mr. Lewis Llewellyn Dillwyn, M.P. for Swansea. Under this
gentleman’s management the works were carried on with much spirit and
consequent success. In 1840 negotiations were entered upon between Mr.
Dillwyn and the Messrs. Brameld of the “Rockingham Works” (which see)
for the letting of the “Glamorgan Pottery” to the latter firm for the
purpose of manufacturing china ware. The following letter in my own
possession is too interesting to omit:--

                                  “BURROWS LODGE, SWANSEA.
                                                     “June 1, 1840.

   “GENTLEMEN,--I am altogether unacquainted with the China
   manufacture and should therefore decline any partnership in
   one. I have, however, no doubt that China may be manufactured
   very profitably in Swansea, and should rejoice to see a
   manufacture established here. I am also convinced that a China
   and Earthenware factory might very materially assist each other
   in many ways. On these accounts I have made an arrangement, at
   some inconvenience to myself, by which I shall be enabled to let
   you the Glamorgan Pottery, which I should think was in every way
   well calculated for a China work. I am ready also to let the
   premises to you on lower terms than I should have expected from
   any other party.

   “The terms I would let them upon to you would be £300 per annum,
   with a stipulation on your part that nothing but China of the
   best transparent body should be manufactured upon them.

   “Should you think this offer worth your consideration, if one
   of your Firm will come down, I shall be happy to shew him
   everything in my power.

                         “I remain, Gentlemen,
                                      “Yours very truly,
                                               “L. L. DILLWYN.”

    “Messrs. Brameld & Co.
         Near Rotherham.”

The letter is addressed to Messrs. Brameld, and a pencilled note by Mr.
Brameld says, “Too high, unless a good mill with it.” The negotiations
fell through, and thus Swansea was deprived of a good chance of
becoming an important centre of porcelain manufacture.

About 1848 or 1850 Mr. Dillwyn introduced a new branch of
manufacture--that of an imitation of Etruscan vases, &c. This ware,
which was called “Dillwyn’s Etruscan Ware,” was a fine rich red body.
On this was printed, in black outline, Etruscan figures, borders,
&c., and the general surface was then painted over and up to the
outlines with a fine black, leaving the figures of the original red
of the body. The effect was extremely good, and some remarkably fine
examples, although but few pieces were made, are still preserved.
The accompanying engraving exhibits an example formerly in my own
collection. It is of extremely elegant form, and the pattern, both
border and figures, is in remarkably good taste. The mark is the one
shown below. It is printed in black on the bottom of the vase. The
forms were all taken either from vases in the British Museum, or from
Sir William Hamilton’s “Antiquités Etrusques, Grecques, et Romaines.”
But very little was produced, as it was not a ware, unfortunately, to
command a ready sale. It was made from clay found in the neighbourhood,
which, when not too highly fired, burns to a good red colour.

  [Illustration: Fig. 654.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 655.]

In 1852 Mr. Lewis Llewellyn Dillwyn retired from the concern, and it
then passed into the hands of Mr. Evans, who carried it on, under the
firm of “Evans, Glasson, & Evans,” until 1859, when, for a time, the
style was altered to “Evans & Co.,” and, subsequently, to “D. J. Evans
& Co.” (son of the Mr. Evans just alluded to), by whom it is at the
present time carried on. The manufacture consisted of the ordinary
classes of white, blue and white, and agate earthenware; the markets
being principally Wales, Ireland, West of England, and Chili. No
trade-mark is used.

About the end of 1869 earthenware was rather suddenly discontinued
being made at the Cambrian Pottery, and the bulk of the workpeople
discharged, a portion only being retained till the ware made was
printed and finished by passing through the kilns. The site of the
Cambrian Pottery, adjacent to the Swansea Canal and the North Dock,
having become more valuable for other commercial purposes than for a
pottery, an arrangement was made by Mr. Dillwyn with Messrs. D. J.
Evans & Co. to surrender the short unexpired term of their lease, so
that as soon as the stock and plant could be cleared off, the buildings
might be taken down or converted to other uses. The whole site was let
to Messrs. Cory, Yeo, & Co., who held an adjoining wharf, and about
June, 1870, they commenced clearing space for erecting their new Patent
Fuel Works, and cutting a branch from the canal across the site to
near the North Dock. The “Patent Fuel Works” was quickly erected (in
part from the old pottery materials at hand), about the centre of the
site, the kilns, workshops, and warehouses taken down (except one or
two buildings and sheds on the west side, converted), so that scarcely
a vestige of what was properly called the working part of the Cambrian
pottery now remains. At the close of the works the copper-plates were
sold to the South Wales Pottery, Llanelly.

Among the artists at one time or other employed at Swansea, besides
Young, of whom I have already spoken, it may be interesting to note
the following: Pardoe, who was an excellent flower-painter (afterwards
of the Nantgarw Works); Baxter, a clever figure painter, who came to
these works from Worcester, to which place he afterwards returned;[58]
Bevington, a flower-painter, also from Worcester; Reed, a modeller
of considerable repute; Hood, also a clever modeller; Jenny, a tracer
in gold; Morris, a fruit-painter; Colclough, who was much admired as
a painter of birds; Evans, who was a talented flower-painter; and
Beddoes, who was the best heraldic painter; to these, of course, must
be added Billingsley, who was the best flower-painter of the day, or
since.

The principal marks used at these works appear to have been the
following:--

  [Illustration: Fig. 656.]

This occurs on a beautiful dark mottled blue oviform earthenware vase
(formerly in the collection of Mr. S. C. Hall), having on one side
an exquisitely painted group of passion-flowers, roses, &c. The mark
is painted on the bottom, and is, I believe, unique. In Mr. Hall’s
collection, besides this splendid example of “Cambrian” ware, were an
oviform vase and cover, having a yellow ground, with blue borders and
handles, and brown scrolls at top; a flower vase on a tripod stand,
blue ground with a white border, painted with acanthus scroll, and on
the cover a bouquet of flowers in relief; a pair of cup-shaped vases,
with blue ground, black borders, and white classical figures at the
top; and a lamp, the handle in form of a female holding a pitcher, the
lamp resting on a pedestal and triangular foot.

Another mark occasionally met with has the words “Cambrian Pottery” in
writing letters, and another has the same words but in capital letters.

    _Cambrian Pottery._      CAMBRIAN
                             POTTERY.

On the porcelain made by Billingsley and Walker for Mr. Dillwyn, the
mark appears to have simply been the name SWANSEA printed in red; or,
as on the subsequent make of china, the name sometimes occurs simply
impressed,

    SWANSEA.    SWANSEA,    or    SWANSEA,    or    Swansea.

Sometimes the name DILLWYN & Co. appears impressed in the body
of the ware, at other times with the addition of a trident, “which,”
Mr. Dillwyn says, “denotes a supposed improvement which was not
ultimately found to answer.” It is thus--


  [Illustration]

        or

  [Illustration: SWANSEA]

Another mark, which I here engrave, has two tridents in saltire and the
name Swansea, thus--

  [Illustration: SWANSEA]

Other marks which I have met with, or have notes of, are--

    DILLWYN & COMPANY      DILLWYN & CO.

  [Illustration]      CAMBRIAN POTTERY.

    OPAQUE CHINA,      HAYNES, DILLWYN & CO.
    SWANSEA.           CAMBRIAN POTTERY.
                       SWANSEA.

The _Glamorgan Pottery_, already alluded to, was situated to the west
of the “Cambrian Pottery,” on the opposite side of the road leading
to the North Dock Bridge. In extent it was about two-thirds of the
Cambrian, and produced similar wares. It was discontinued some years
ago, the kilns taken down, and part of the building converted into iron
warehouses. It was, I am informed by Mr. Holland, built about the
year 1816, by a Mr. Baker, who was soon after joined in partnership
by Mr. Bevan and Mr. Herwain, and the business carried on under the
style of “Baker, Bevan, & Herwain,” until 1839, when it seems to have
been purchased by Mr. Dillwyn, who, in the following year, as I have
shown, offered it to Messrs. Brameld, of the Rockingham China Works,
for the purpose of carrying on the porcelain manufacture there. Mr.
Baker also, at one time, held another small pottery for a finer kind of
earthenware, near the river Tawe, in another part of Swansea.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Rickard._--In Swansea, too, is also a small potwork belonging to Mr.
Rickard or Ricketts, who produces only the commonest kinds of black and
Rockingham ware tea-pots, jugs, &c., and hardware jugs of mixed local
clay and Dorset clay (principally for the home markets), ornamental
flower-pots, garden vases, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Landore Pottery._--About 1848 Mr. John Forbes Calland, of Swansea
district, built a pottery, conveniently situated, on the Swansea Canal,
and near the river Tawe at Landore, about a mile from Swansea. This was
worked for a few years by Mr. Calland, who produced printed and common
earthenware from white clays, in dinner, tea, and toilet ware, for the
home trade under the style

    and mark of J. K. CALLAND & CO., and  CALLAND
                LANDORE POTTERY.          SWANSEA.

Not being commercially successful, Mr. Calland discontinued the
manufacture about 1856, when the whole of the copper-plates then in use
were transferred to the South Wales Pottery at Llanelly. The Landore
Pottery has since been converted into a smelting-works, and is now used
for smelting copper ores.


                               LLANELLY.

_South Wales Pottery._--These works, belonging to Messrs. Holland
& Guest, are now the only blue and white earthenware manufactory in
the principality. They were established in 1839 by William Chambers
Jun., Esq., of Llanelly House, Llanelly, who carried on the manufacture
of earthenware for home and foreign markets, with different managers,
up to the end of 1854. The general classes of goods manufactured were
for the home trade, and included white or cream colour, edged, dipt,
painted, and printed wares. Other descriptions of goods, viz., coloured
bodies, figured, enamelled, and parian, were tried and worked for a
time, but soon discontinued. It was also intended, a few years after
starting the pottery, to commence the making of china, and a kiln was
built specially for that purpose, but the idea was then abandoned, and
porcelain has never been made at these works. For some two or three
years, about 1850, a large quantity of white granite, printed, and
flown printed ware, was made for the United States market, the crates
being sent per vessel from Llanelly to Liverpool for transshipment.
During the first few years after the commencement of these works the
principal trade was by coasting vessels carrying coals to ports in
England and Ireland, and by carts and waggons inland. When the South
Wales Railway (now Great Western, South Wales section) was opened to
Swansea, crates of earthenware for forwarding were frequently sent
there by road, twelve miles, till the continuation of the railway past
Llanelly was opened.

At the end of 1854 the business of the South Wales Pottery was
transferred to Messrs. Coombs and Holland, who were then connected
in the management, and they carried on the works till May, 1858,
when there was a dissolution of partnership, and Mr. W. T. Holland
continued the business alone till November, 1869, when he was joined
in partnership by Mr. D. Guest, under the firm of Holland & Guest. The
trade after 1854 was chiefly local or South Wales, with the West of
England districts and South of Ireland for seven or eight years, when
there was a partial discontinuance of travelling, and introduction of
orders for foreign markets, as for South America, Brazil, Chili, East
Indies, France, and the Mediterranean, so that the working became about
half for foreign markets. The goods produced consist of a variety of
table, tea, and toilet services, and other ordinary articles in printed
and flown printed earthenware of average quality, and the usual classes
of white, cream-coloured, sponged and painted wares.

It is interesting to add that the copper-plates formerly in use at
the other earthenware potteries in South Wales--now discontinued
working, viz., the Landore, the Ynisymudw, and the Cambrian Pottery,
Swansea--were purchased for the South Wales Pottery, and selections
of patterns made from these (as well as more modern styles) have been
introduced in patterns and shapes. Mr. Holland was an exhibitor at the
International Exhibition of 1862.


                              YNISYMUDW.

_Terra Cotta Works._--This manufactory, now devoted to terra cotta
goods, fire bricks, and sanitary pipes, was formerly an earthenware
pottery, where ordinary blue printed ware was manufactured. It is
situate in the Swansea Valley, about ten miles from Swansea on the
Brecon road, is on the Swansea Canal (which extends seven miles higher
up the valley), and about two miles from Pontardawe station, on the
Midland Railway Swansea Vale section. It was commenced as a fire brick
works (there having been a small common brick works there previously)
in 1840 by Mr. William Williams and his brother, Mr. Michael Martyn
Williams, of Swansea, who then took a long lease of the premises, and
soon afterwards introduced, in addition, the manufacture of the now
famed “South Wales Dinas Bricks” from the Cribbath stone, obtained near
the top of the Swansea Canal. These bricks are still made there, and
the “Ynisymudw dinas” are equal to the best “dinas” or silica bricks
made. Terra cotta work was also introduced, and made in buff of good
quality, with some success. About 1850 Mr. William Williams and his
brother decided to add the manufacture of earthenware, in table, tea,
toilet, and other services, &c., in common white, painted and printed
wares, for home or local trade, and foreign shipment (chiefly worked
for South America, crates sent to Liverpool per steamer from Swansea);
and this was continued till about 1859, when the blue-and-white
earthenware branch was discontinued (the copper-plates being purchased
for the South Wales Pottery, Llanelly), and the works transferred to
another brother, Mr. Charles Williams, and in course of a year or
so it was disposed of to Messrs. Griffith Lewis and John Morgan, of
Pontardawe, who carried it on under the style of the “Ynisymudw Brick
Company,” “Ynisymudw Pottery Company,” and “Lewis & Morgan,” at various
periods during eleven years, in the early part of which the manufacture
of Rockingham tea-pots, &c., glazed stoneware bottles and similar
goods, was for a time carried on. From the first, arrangements had
been made for the extension of the manufacture of salt glazed sanitary
pipes, using the three old pottery glost kilns for this purpose, and
the manufacture of these, together with fire bricks and terra cotta
goods, was continued till the end of 1870, when the works and business
were transferred to Mr. William Thomas Holland, of the South Wales
Pottery, Llanelly, by whom they have been continued. In 1871 Mr.
Holland exhibited specimens of his fire bricks, glazed pipes, and
terra cotta manufacture at South Kensington. The premises consist of
ten kilns, with ample space for extensions, and the works are situate
in a beautiful part of the Swansea Valley, on the river Tawe, with a
tributary stream, the Cwm Du, running through the premises, giving a
supply of good water. Probably the manufacture of white earthenware
will ere long be revived at Ynisymudw as an addition to the present
manufactures.


                               NANTGARW.

These short-lived works, whose history is so mixed up with those of
Swansea, Derby, Coalport, Pinxton, and other places, were commenced on
a very small scale, in 1813, by William Billingsley,[59] the famous
flower-painter of Derby, and his son-in-law, George Walker; the former
at that time passing under the assumed name of Beeley, which was
simply a contraction of his own name B’ley or B[illings]ley. Shortly
afterwards, having applied to the Board of Trade for patronage and,
of course, Government aid, Mr. Dillwyn, of the “Cambrian Pottery,”
at Swansea, went over to examine and report upon the ware; and
this examination resulted in his entering into an engagement with
Billingsley and Walker, by which they, with their recipe, their moulds
and other appliances, removed to Swansea. In about two years this
engagement was brought to a close, and Billingsley and Walker returned
to Nantgarw, where they again commenced the manufacture of china of the
same excellent and peculiar kind for which they had become so famous.
The proprietors appear to have met with liberal friends to assist them
in their undertaking. The Hon. William Booth Grey, of Duffryn, is said
to have subscribed £1,000 towards the undertaking, and other gentlemen
almost equally liberal sums. The whole of the money subscribed,
understood to have been about £8,000, is said to have been expended in
little more than two years. This in great measure appears to have been
caused by experiments and trials and alterations in buildings, &c.,
and by the immense waste in “seconds” goods, or “wasters,” which were
invariably broken up, instead of, as now at most works, being disposed
of at a cheaper rate.

That Billingsley and Walker, with Mr. Young, who appears to have come
from Swansea to join them, as also Mr. Pardoe, from the same works,
who was formerly of Staffordshire (with Mr. Turner), and afterwards
of Bristol, and who was a clever painter, were the proprietors of
the renewed works, seems evident, and they were carried on with
considerable success.

  [Illustration: Fig. 657.--Nantgarw Works.]

The productions of Nantgarw were, as far as beauty of body and of
decoration, as well as form, are concerned, a complete success, and
the works gradually, but surely, made their way in public estimation.
The London houses--especially it is said Mr. Mortlock’s--found it to
their advantage to support the manufactory, and there was thus no
difficulty in finding a good and profitable market. A service was made
and presented to the Prince of Wales (afterwards King George IV.); “the
pattern was a green vase, with a single rose on every piece, and every
rose different.” This beautiful service was painted, I believe, partly
by Billingsley and partly by Pardoe. It helped very materially to make
the works fashionable, and it is said that they were visited by numbers
of the nobility and gentry, “as many as forty gentlemen’s carriages
having been known to be there in one day.” A considerable quantity of
the Nantgarw ware was sold in the white to Mortlock, who had it painted
in London, and fired at the enamel kiln of Messrs. Robins & Randall
of Spa Fields. Webster, one of the painters of the Derby China Works,
thus decorated a deal of this ware in London. The trade which was thus
beginning to prosper being felt to be likely to some considerable
extent to affect that of the Coalport Works, Mr. Rose (of those works)
entered into an arrangement with Billingsley and Walker by which he
bought up their concern, made a permanent engagement with them, and at
once removed them and their moulds, and everything else to Coalport.
The manufacture of china was, therefore, closed at Nantgarw. In 1823
Mr. Pardoe died. Mr. Young removed, I am informed, to Droitwich, where
he carried on a salt-work. Billingsley and Walker, as I have already
stated, removed to Coalport, where Billingsley died in 1827 or 1828.
Walker ultimately sailed for America, where he established a pottery,
still, I believe, in operation.

  [Illustration: Fig. 658.]

In 1823 the greater portion of the china works were pulled down, the
dwelling-house and some other portions alone remaining. In 1832, Mr.
William Henry Pardoe, of Bristol (who was a china painter of great
skill), a good practical potter of great experience in the art which
had, through Richard Champion and his successors, made his city famous,
entered upon the premises, and commenced there a red-ware pottery,
in connection with an extensive tobacco-pipe manufactory. To this he
afterwards added Rockingham ware and stoneware departments, in each
of which he produced goods of excellent quality. Mr. Pardoe died in
1867, and the Nantgarw works--those works around which such a halo of
interest exists--are still carried on by his widow and her family. The
goods now produced are red or brown earthenware, made from clay found
in the neighbourhood--many of the pitchers being of purely mediæval
form--stoneware bottles of every kind, jugs, butter-pots, cheese
and bread pans, foot and carriage warmers, snuff-jars, hunting jugs
and mugs, tobacco-jars, jugs, &c., and other goods; tobacco-pipes,
which experienced smokers declare to be at least equal to those from
Broseley, garden-pots, pancheons, &c., are also made.

The only marks used at Nantgarw which can be considered to be marks of
the works are the following, impressed in the the body of the china:

    NANT-GARW
    G. W.

the G. W. being the initials of George Walker, the son-in-law and
partner of Billingsley; and the single word NANT-GARW in red
colour.[60] Another mark, supposed to belong to these works is this:
[symbol]; with the number of the pattern as “No.” added.

  [Illustration: Fig. 659.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 660.]

The goods produced were tea, dinner, and dessert services, vases,
match-pots, cabinet cups, pen and wafer trays, inkstands, and a large
variety of other articles. One of the most interesting relics of these
works which has come under my notice is the cup here engraved, which
was formerly in my own collection. It has been painted with what
is technically known as the “Chantilly pattern,” in blue, and then
has been used as a trial piece for colours and glazes. It bears in
different parts of its surface various washes of colour, with marks
and contractions to show the mixture, which have been submitted to the
action of the enamel kiln. In my own collection are also some other
highly interesting examples, including an oval tray, painted with
flowers, a plate, “Chantilly” pattern saucers, and some interesting
fragments and relics of the old works. In the Jermyn Street Museum the
collector will find some good examples for comparison, as he will also
in some private collections. Some remarkably fine examples of Nantgarw
china are in the possession of Sir Ivor Bertie Guest, Bart., and others
are in various collections.

The village of Nantgarw is situated in the parish of Eglw y Sillan,
in Glamorganshire; it is eight miles from Cardiff, and one mile from
the “Taffs Well” Station, on the Taff Valley Railway; and the Rhymney
Valley Railway is also equally near.

The works shown in the engraving are picturesquely situated by the side
of the Glamorganshire Canal, on the road to Caerphilly, from whose
glorious old ruined castle they are only a few miles distant.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Brown and Stoneware Potteries._--The other works (besides Nantgarw)
in Glamorganshire and Monmouthshire are those of Messrs. Henry James,
Joseph Rogers, Evan Davies, George Sherrin, and Thomas Moore. At these
only common, coarse brownware pitchers and other domestic vessels are
made.


                               CARDIGAN.

_The Cardigan Potteries._--These pottery works were established in 1875
by Mr. J. H. Miles and Mr. William Woodward, and were at first intended
simply for the production of common coarse red earthenware goods for
domestic and horticultural purposes. The clay of this district having
been found to be of a superior character and capable of being turned
to good account for better classes of goods, the firm turned their
attention to its development, and have succeeded in producing not only
articles of an artistic character, but architectural decorations of
more than average excellence. The productions of Messrs. Woodward and
Co. are vases, jugs, flower stands, and other ornamental articles,
and these are decorated and glazed in a manner peculiarly their own,
and which gives to them a distinctive character over those of other
manufactories. In some, quaint and well-designed patterns are impressed
in the clay, and the whole being surface coloured and highly glazed
have a rich and peculiar appearance. The firm trade under the names
of “The Cardigan Potteries,” “Woodward and Co.,” and their works are
called the “Patent Brick, Tile, and Pottery Works” and “Cardigan
Potteries.” The goods are principally for the Welsh coast and for
England, but the trade is rapidly developing itself, and by the
addition of other branches, especially in blue clay goods, will become
an important feature in Welsh manufactures. Glazed and unglazed bricks
and tiles, coloured tiles for interior mural decoration, and paving
tiles of various kinds, form also a staple branch of trade of the
Cardigan Works.

The marks used by the firm are the words “CARDIGAN POTTERIES” and
“WOODWARD AND CO.,” impressed in the ware, and a design of a brick
bearing the words WOODWARD AND CO., CARDIGAN.


                               HEREFORD.

_Lugwardine Works._--These encaustic tile works, situated at
Withington, four miles from Hereford, were established in 1861 by Mr.
William Godwin, and are of considerable extent. In encaustic tiles Mr.
Godwin has paid particular attention to the reproduction of mediæval
patterns in all their entirety, both as to fac-simile of form and
ornament, and antique appearance of surface, and in these essentials to
artistic effect has succeeded admirably. Many of his tiles are exact
reproductions, not old designs modernised, and this it is that gives to
floors laid by him that peculiar charm which they undoubtedly possess.
In addition to actual copies of old tiles, Mr. Godwin has produced a
large variety of new designs, in which the patterns are characterized
by pure mediæval feeling and by excellent workmanship. The tiles are of
extremely hard and durable quality, and the colours clear, distinct,
and good. Mr. Godwin’s name impressed on the back of the tile is his
mark.


                               TORQUAY.

_Terra-Cotta Works._--The Terra-Cotta Works at Hele Cross, Torquay,
were established in October, 1875, by Dr. Gillow, who that year
discovered the bed of clay, and are worked by a Limited Liability
Company, with that clever and energetic gentleman as chairman and
general director. The clay is of remarkably fine, tenacious, and
durable quality, and is capable of working to the very highest degree
of perfection. Its colour is a rich full red, and its surface almost
metallic in its hardness and fine texture; it is almost identical in
quality and beauty of tone to that at Watcombe, to whose productions
those of Torquay bear a marked resemblance. Dr. Gillow has, very
wisely, directed his efforts entirely in an Art direction, with a
determination to produce only works of a high class of excellence,
whether the designs or objects be simple or elaborate, low priced
or costly, useful or strictly ornamental. Architectural terra-cotta
is not made or intended to be made, but only Art productions of an
ornamental character. To this end a staff of forty or more experienced
workmen has been got together, and skilled modellers, enamellers, and
decorators engaged from other seats of manufacture. The company started
with the aim of producing works of a high standard of excellence,
and thus expressed their intention: “They (the Company) believe that
they have at Hele Cross the best deposit of clay yet discovered,
and their one aim and object is to improve the artistic standard by
persevering energy; one year’s existence has given grounds for hope and
encouragement; much has been done, but much more remains to be done.
They trust to improve year by year until they place terra-cotta in
its old proud position as a favoured branch of Ceramic Art, and until
Devonshire productions stand unrivalled throughout Europe.” The success
which has so far attended Dr. Gillow’s efforts is very marked, and
shows that they have been directed in a right way and in a commendable
spirit.

  [Illustration: TORQUAY TERRA COTTA C^o. LIMITED.

  Figs. 661 and 662.]

The productions of the Torquay Terra-Cotta Company are statuettes,
single figures and groups, busts, groups of animals, birds, &c.;
vases, ewers, bottles, jugs, and tazzæ; butter-coolers, spill cases,
and other domestic appliances; plaques of various sizes; candlesticks,
toilet-trays, water-bottles, tobacco vases, &c. Many of the productions
are painted and enamelled in good taste, and the ornamentation,
whether in colour or gilding, is characterized by clever workmanship
and judicious arrangement. Many designs of vases, plaques, &c., are
original and in good taste. The company supply not only the home but
foreign markets, and have received high recognition, with medals from
the Royal Cornwall Polytechnic Society and from the Turners’ Company.
The marks used by the firm are an oval garter bearing the words TORQUAY
TERRA-COTTA CO., and in the centre LIMITED, printed on the ware; the
name TORQUAY impressed in the clay; the words within a single oval
line; and the monogram, Fig. 652, which is a combination of the letters
T T C, for “Torquay Terra Cotta.”


                              ALDERHOLT.

At this place, in Hampshire, potteries for common coarse ware for
domestic purposes exist. The bed of clay is the same as that in the New
Forest worked in early ages, as described in the first volume.


                              SMETHWICK.

_Tile Works._--Mr. T. W. Camm commenced the business of Art decoration
of tiles in 1866, in Brewery Street, and later on new buildings were
erected in High Street. Having been joined in partnership by Messrs.
J. M. and H. C. Camm, the business was carried on under the style of
“Camm Brothers”--the general management of the business being divided
into three departments, each under the special management of one of
the partners, the first-named taking the designing department, the
second the painting, and the third the glazing. By this excellent
arrangement the whole processes from beginning to end are carried
on under the eye of the entire firm, and thus excellence in each is
insured. Messrs. Camm Brothers do not manufacture the tiles themselves,
but purchase them in their unglazed state and then decorate and
glaze them. Their designs are extremely varied, and the whole being
hand-painted they are adapted to the tastes and requirements of their
customers and designed in strict accordance with the style of building
they are intended to adorn. The figure subjects, whether allegorical,
historical, or otherwise, the productions of this firm, are of the
highest order; the drawing bold, firm, masterly, and effective, and the
colouring rich, full, and harmonious. Some other larger works, notably
historical plaques of two or three feet in length and proportionate
depth, are grand in conception, and form historical pictures of
considerable value. The firm also produce appropriate tile-decorations
for furniture, cheeks of fire-places, hearths, linings of bath and
other rooms, friezes, memorial figures and other designs for churches
and for every purpose where they can be made available, and these are
characterized by the same good taste that is shown in their stained
glass. The mark is simply the name “CAMM BROTHERS, SMETHWICK.”


                               READING.

_Coley Avenue Works._--These works were established in 1861 by Messrs.
Collier & Son, and are continued under the style of “S. & E. Collier.”
Brown terra-cotta, glazed and unglazed brown ware, and roofing and
other tiles are the products of these works.


                            WAKEFIELD MOOR.

“Potters Pale Yellow Clay of Wakefield Moor,” is mentioned in a
list of clays, by Houghton, in 1693. As the list contains valuable
particulars I give it entire. In the same work is a vast deal of
curious information on tobacco-pipe clay and the making of pipes, brick
and tile-making, etc. The list is as follows:

   “A TABLE OF CLAYS.

    Pure, that is, such as is soft like butter to the teeth, and has
      little or no greetiness in it.

    Greasy, to be reckoned amongst the medicinal earth, or _terræ
      sigillatæ_.

        1. Fullers earth.
                   {At _Brickhill_ in _Northamptonshire_.
        {yellowish {At ... under the _Yorkshire_ woolds.
        {brown about _Halifax_.
        {white in _Derbyshire_ lead mines.

        2. Boli {In _Cleveland_.
                {At _Linton_ upon _Wharfe_.

        3. Pale yellow, in the marlepit at _Ripley_.

        4. Cow shot clay, or the soap scale lying in coal mines.

        5. A dark blue clay or marl at _Tolthrop_. Harsh and dusty when
             dry.

        6. Creta properly so called, or the milk-white clay of the isle
             of _Wight_.

        7. The potter’s pale yellow clay of _Wakefield_ moor.

        8. The blue clay of _Bullinbrooke_ pottery in _Lincolnshire_.

        9. A blue clay in _Bugthorp_ beck, in which the _astroites_ are
             found.

        10. Yellow clay in the seams of the red sand rock at _Bilbro_.

        11. Fine red clay in sand rock, {at _Bilbro_.
                                        {at _Rippon_.

        12. A soft chalky blue clay} at _Buttercrain_.
                                   }
        13. A soft chalky red clay }

      Stony when dry.

        14. A red stone clay } In the banks of _Whitcar_ beck, near
              _Leppington_: and at

        15. A blue stone clay} _Housam_ in the _Milscar_.

        16. Clunch, a white stone clay in _Cambridgeshire_.

      Mixt with round sand or pebble.

        17. The yellow loam of _Skipwith_ moor, _Yorkshire_.

        18. A red sandy clay in the right hand bank of the road beyond
              _Collingham_, near the lime kilns going to ----

        19. A red sandy clay in the red sand rock near _Rippon_.

      With flat or thin sand, guttering with _Mica_.

        20. _Crouch_ white clay _Derbyshire_, of which the glass pots
              are made at _Nottingham_.

        21. Grey or bluish tobacco-pipe clay at _Halifax_.

        22. A red clay in the red sand rock at _Rotherham_.”


                              DITCHLING.

At Ditchling, in Sussex, pot-works are said to have existed for
“several hundred years.” Be this as it may, some old pot-works for
the coarsest brown ware, and bricks and tiles, were bought in 1870 by
Messrs. H. Johnson & Co., in the belief that from the superior quality
of the native red clay they would be able to produce architectural
terra-cotta of a more than ordinarily durable quality. By them the
Ditchling Works were much extended, and they have succeeded in making
terra-cotta, both useful and ornamental, of an excellent bright red
colour, and a fine hard, durable, and almost metallic surface. In this,
with careful workmanship, they manufacture well-designed terminals,
ridge crestings, crosses, panels, mouldings and all the usual varieties
of architectural pottery, as well as moulded bricks, tiles, &c. Among
public buildings where the Ditchling terra-cotta has been successfully
used is the St. James’s Hall, Piccadilly, and the firm have received
medals from the London International Exhibition and the Philadelphia
Exhibition. In 1875 Messrs. H. Johnson & Co. opened extensive works on
the same vein of clay at Keymer Junction. They are the largest works in
Sussex.


                              AMBLECOTE.

A pottery at this place is mentioned by Plot in 1686.


                              LEICESTER.

_Spinney Hill Works._--At these works, belonging to Mr. Fielding Moore,
garden vases, flower baskets, rustic ornaments, fountains, pedestals,
flower-pots, and all the usual variety of terra-cotta goods are made;
as are also similar articles in ordinary red and other clays.


                              WEDNESBURY.

A potwork existed here in the seventeenth century. Plot, who wrote in
1686, says “of these (_i.e._ clays from Horsley Heath, &c.) they make
divers sorts of vessels at Wednesbury, which they paint with slip, made
of a reddish sort of earth gotten at Tipton.”


                              WINCHESTER.

A famous manufactory of tobacco-pipes existed here in the seventeenth
century. Ben Jonson notes that they were the best made in his day.


                              AYLESFORD.

_Terra-cotta Works_ were established here about 1850, by Mr. Edward
Betts, who discovered a valuable bed of plastic clay on his estate in
the neighbourhood. At the Exhibition of 1851 Mr. Betts exhibited a
terra-cotta vase (Fig. 663) made at Aylesford from this native clay,
from a design furnished by Mr. John Thomas, the architect.


                                EXETER.

  [Illustration: Fig. 663.]

That tobacco-pipes were made in Exeter in 1654 is curiously proved by
the following case of supposed witchcraft:--“12 August, 1654. One Diana
Crosse, a widow, suspected of being a witch, was ordered by the judge
of Assize to be committed for trial at the city sessions. Mr. Edward
Trible, a tobacco-pipe maker, one of the victims of the witch’s arts,
deposed that Mrs. Crosse on one occasion came to his house for fire,
which was delivered to her, but for the space of one month afterwards
he could not make or work his tobacco-pipes to his satisfaction--they
were altogether either over or under burnt. The witch, too, cast her
evil eye upon a boy in his employ, and ‘affirmed’ that he should never
be well, and thereupon the boy ‘grew into a distracted condition, and
was much consumed and pyned away in body.’”


                               LINCOLN.

A very interesting discovery of potter’s moulds, for heads for
impressing on earthenware, was made a few years back in the parish of
St. Mary-le-Wigford, Lincoln. The discovery consisted, according to
the last edition of Marryat (edited by my friend Mrs. Pallisser) where
the relics are described and carefully engraved, of the remains of a
potter’s kiln with numerous fragments of glazed pottery, among which
was one piece bearing the head impressed from one of these moulds. One
of them, engraved in Marryat’s highly interesting volume, represents
a male head, probably that of Edward III., both beard and hair curled
at side as on the coins of that monarch and the first and second
Edwards, and the other the head of a lady, probably Queen Philippa,
with the characteristic square-topped reticulated head-dress. These
moulds are in the Trollope collection. A potter’s mould of a head, of
the Romano-British period, found by myself at Headington, is in my
possession, and is engraved in Vol. I., Figs. 166, 167.




                             CHAPTER XII.

   Irish Ceramics--Early Pottery of Ireland--The
   Cairns--The Crannogs--Mediæval Pottery of
   Ireland--Dublin--Delamain--Stringfellow--Grants by
   Irish Parliament--Donovan--Delft Ware--Brown Ware
   Manufactories--Belfast--Leathes and Smith--Delft Ware--Coates’
   Pottery--China Works--Florence Court Pottery--Coal Island
   Pottery--Youghall Pottery--Captain Beauclerc’s Terra
   Cotta--Larne Pottery Works--Castle Elspie Pottery--Belleek China
   and Earthenware Works, &c.


The early pottery of Ireland, although bearing a general resemblance
in many of its characteristics to that of England and other nations,
nevertheless differs from all others in some of its features, both
of form and decoration. As in other countries, the great bulk of
examples of early fictile art that remain to us in Ireland, and upon
which we have to found our knowledge, are the cinerary urns--the clay
vessels in which, when cremation was in vogue, the ashes and burnt
bones of the dead were placed for burial in cairns or otherwise--and
food and drinking-vessels found (when inhumation was observed) in the
grave-mounds of the people. But, in addition to this, the “crannogs,”
or lake dwellings of the Irish people, afford a vast fund of
information upon the form and decoration of the domestic vessels in use
in former ages.

In the first volume of this work I have written much upon early fictile
art, and in other works have treated so fully upon the contents of
the barrows[61] of early ages, that it is not needful to pursue
the subject here. I may, however, with special reference to Irish
examples, quote the words of my late friend, Sir William Wilde--one
of the most painstaking authorities upon Irish antiquities-and then
pass on to a consideration of some of the examples that remain to us.
“Irish cinerary urns have,” Sir William says, “been found under three
circumstances: in small cists, placed without any ostensible mark, at
least at the present day, beneath the surface of the soil, each just
sufficiently large to hold one or two vessels. The chamber is sometimes
occupied with the urn and its contents alone; in other cases, it also
contains charcoal and portions of burned bone; and, in some instances,
the flooring-stones have become vitrified upon the upper surface, thus
leading us to believe that the funeral pyre was lighted over the grave
after it was formed; of this, the charcoal and the vitrification of the
stones afford presumptive proof. These small chambers are sometimes
found near the surface, or on the periphery of the larger tumuli that
usually cover cromlechs or surround extensive sepulchral chambers, and
appear to be of a much more recent date than the original structure
of the tumulus in which they are placed. Such minor interments
may have been those of the family or descendants of the persons
originally interred beneath; or the place--strong in the odour of
sanctity--may have been resorted to as a burial-ground long subsequent
to its original foundation, from that feeling of veneration which
instinctively consecrates the resting-place of the dead. These urns
are also found imbedded in the earth, in which case they are generally
aggregated in cemeteries upon the sides of hills.“ As in England, so in
Ireland, interments both by cremation and inhumation[62] were made,
and, with the latter, vessels of clay of various forms were placed.

  [Illustration: Fig. 664.--From Altegarron, near Belfast.[63]]

  [Illustration: Fig. 665.--From Ballon Hill, Co. Carlow.]

The material of the early Irish urns is simply coarse clay, but this
varies in different localities. With some sand has evidently been
more or less mixed with the clay, while “in those which show a higher
degree of culture in the makers,” as Sir William Wilde says, “sand
and small fragments of stone, possibly broken for the purpose, were
mixed through the plastic mass, and also rubbed (perhaps to assist in
drying, as well as in giving them stability) upon the inner surface,
especially near the bottom. A micaceous clay here appears to answer
the same end; but in some of the very fine specimens minute particles
of quartz and felspar may be observed coating the interior, which,
from the sharpness of their fracture, would appear to have been broken
specially for the purpose. These fragments of sand or stone may also be
seen in the fracture, but are never observed upon the outer surface.
In colour the Irish urns differ considerably upon the outer and inner
surfaces. The latter is almost invariably blackish or dark brown, the
result of partial torrification, and perhaps from the heated bones and
charcoal placed within them, either when soft or after they had been
sun-baked.[64] The colouring generally passes through four-fifths of
the mass. The outer surface is either a light red, grey, or brown. The
first is most usual, and appears to be the result of the atmosphere,
which was, however, excluded from the interior by the mass of the
contents of the urn. The colour of the exterior usually passes for some
distance within the lip. The drab or clay-coloured urns bear but little
mark of fire, either within or without. The brown belongs only to the
thinnest and hardest description of pottery. Assuming that the majority
of the mortuary urns (except those for very distinguished persons) were
constructed at the grave, the artist was indebted to the clay at hand
in the locality for the materials with which he worked, and hence the
great variety in the composition of our cinerary urns.”

  [Illustration: Fig. 666.--From Cairn Thierna, Co. Cork.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 667.--From Ballydoolough.]

The ornamentation upon the earliest Irish pottery, both cinerary urns
and otherwise, is extremely varied, both in character and in mode of
arrangement. Sometimes simply a number of dots, or punctures, pretty
nearly cover the surface; at others, these punctures are intermixed in
regular patterns with other ornaments. Sometimes again they exhibit
ridges or raised bands more or less decorated, and at others the usual
herringbone or zigzag patterns produced by incised or impressed lines
are the most prominent feature. Again, in some examples, patterns
produced by pressing a twisted thong into the pliant clay are met with,
while incised or impressed circular, semicircular, and other lines
ornament others. “Many of these lines have a pectinated appearance,
as if indicated with a traverser, or a rowel-like instrument, such
as that used by pastry-cooks” at the present day, and sometimes the
ornament is produced by simple scratches. Other urns are one mass of
ornament, rich in appearance and varied in character; and others have
what may not inaptly be called flat circular medallions on their sides.
Others, again, present a series of “slashes” with intervening impressed
ornaments.

  [Illustration: Fig. 668.--From Trillick Barr.]

It is a remarkable fact, as pointed out by Sir W. Wilde, that no
examples, so far as his knowledge went, occurred on which “any trace
of the spire, which characterizes the decorations of some of the very
oldest sepulchral monuments in Ireland,” is to be found; but a peculiar
form of ornamentation, made by straight lines, is identical with that
on some carved stones at the entrance to the most remarkable of these
edifices--that of New Grange.

Fig. 668 is a remarkably elegant urn found in a cairn at Trillick
Barr, Tyrone. In general form it is slightly contracted towards the
mouth, and has two raised encircling bands, and an extended rim at the
base. The lower part of the body is decorated with vertical lines, the
spaces between being here and there filled in with impressed ornaments;
and the portions between the encircling bands are also filled in with
diagonal lines of indentations. These also are continued round the rim
at the mouth, while the raised bands bear a double engrailed pattern.
Fig. 669, five inches in height, was found at Ballybit, Lisnevagh,
county Carlow. Like the last, it contracts slightly towards the mouth.
It has three encircling raised bands, with intervening indented
ones, around its centre, and these are richly ornamented. The upper
portion of the vase bears a border of curved lines--a large species of
engrailing--incised, and the lower portion similarly produced lines
forming herringbone and “crossed” patterns; around the rim and the
upper rib it is elaborately ornamented with impressed points.

  [Illustration: Fig. 669.--From Ballybit, Co. Carlow.]

Fig. 670 is of a totally different character, both in form and
ornamentation. It was found in a cist, on the lands of Mackrackens,
in the parish of Leckpatrick, county Tyrone, and is five inches in
height. “At its greatest circumference, it is surrounded by a narrow,
circular groove [much of the same character as some Celtic urns found
in Derbyshire, and this groove is, as it were, clasped by five small
pierced knobs, equidistant from each other. From their shape, and
closeness to the vessel,” continues Mr. Geoghegan, “I cannot think they
were intended for handles. There are no indentations or marks to lead
us to suppose they were designed for that purpose. It appears to me
their use was to retain in the groove a strong cord which twined round
the urn. From this strong cord three strings could be attached, meeting
in a knot, for the purpose of carrying or conveying the urn from the
scene of cremation to the cist in which it was finally to be placed,
or from the place where it was made.” It bears a strong resemblance
in outline to the wooden vessel, Fig. 667. In the museum of the Royal
Irish Academy urns of this same general form are preserved, as are also
examples of almost every known variety. Figs. 671 to 675 are from that
Museum, and tell their own tale, both as to peculiarity of outline
and richness of decoration. An immolation urn, found within a larger
vessel at Mayhora, near Castlecomer, of much the same form as Fig. 671,
has been described by my friend Mr. Graves in the _Archæological
Journal_; the lower part is elegantly ribbed.

  [Illustration: Fig. 670.--From Mackrackens, Co. Tyrone.]

Fig. 687, from the “Giant’s Grave,” on the Loughrey demesne, in county
Tyrone, is of globular form, five inches in height, and decorated with
vertical lines of indentations and encircling lines incised in the
clay. Between the encircling lines at the top, as well as those at the
bottom, are rows of square indentations; and inside the mouth is also
ornamented.

  [Illustration: Figs. 671 to 675.--From the Museum of the Royal
  Irish Academy.]

Urns of a different character of ornamentation were discovered some
years ago at Ballon Hill, between Fenagh and Tullow, county Carlow.
Among these was one, more than fifteen inches in height, about fourteen
inches in width at the mouth, and of “flower-pot” form, very similar
to some English examples. It had two raised encircling ribs, and the
upper part was ornamented with a chevron or zigzag pattern produced
by impressed twisted thongs. Another was of bowl form with raised
bands, and every part elaborately ornamented, the upper and lower parts
bearing saltires alternating with incised lines; it was of much the
same general form as the one engraved on Fig. 687. Another, of more
flowing form, whose outline took a graceful jar-like curve, gradually
swelling outward from the contraction below the mouth and tapering
down to the foot, was ornamented with impressed thongs and incised
lines. Others were found which partook of the same general shapes
as other examples here engraved, and were more or less ornamented
with encircling lines, zigzag and other patterns, and impressed
points, curves, &c.; one or two had raised knobs. One of the richest
of “immolation urns,” about two and three-quarter inches in height
(and filled with small burnt bones when found), of the Irish series,
also brought to light in this interment, is engraved on Fig. 665.
Another remarkable urn (Fig. 666), found at Cairn Thierna, county Cork
(engraved in the _Archæological Journal_), has its outline totally
different from others, and is elaborately and delicately ornamented
over almost its entire surface.

Fig. 664 carefully represents an urn found some years back at a
place called Yellow Jack’s Cairn, in the townland of Altegarron, on
the slopes of Divis Mountain, near Belfast. It was five inches in
height, and six in diameter at the mouth. The whole surface was richly
decorated with incised and impressed lines, and other ornamentation;
these are sufficiently well shown in the engraving, and therefore need
no description.

Occasionally covers made of the same clay as the urns themselves, and
ornamented in a similar manner, have been found. One remarkable example
discovered at Danes Fort had a perfect cover, or lid, with a handle at
the top.

Some of the most curious and certainly most interesting urns which have
come under my notice, were found at Drumnakilly, near Omagh, county
Tyrone, in 1872–3, and have been described and figured by Mr. Wakeman.
The first of these, Fig. 676, 3 feet 6 inches in circumference at the
mouth, and of proportionate height, is elaborately ornamented with
incised lines, “exactly of that class which we find upon the golden
ornaments and other antiquities of pre-historic times preserved in our
museums;” its outline bears a graceful curve from the mouth, swelling
out in the middle, and gradually tapering down to the foot. Around
the upper part is a series of perpendicular broad indentations with
herringbone pattern between; next follow a number of encircling lines,
scoriated between; and the middle part of the urn is ornamented with
zigzag and other lines. Another of pretty much the same general form
(Fig. 679) but devoid of ornament, contained within it an immolation
urn (Fig. 680). Another (Fig. 682) is unique in its ornamentation; “its
neck and lip, though exquisitely proportioned, are devoid of ornament,
while the body of the vessel is encircled by a network pattern executed
in bold relief; the substance of this pattern is different from, and
finer in quality than, that of which the rest of the urn was composed.
It is evident upon even a slight examination that this raised ornament
was added after the formation and fire-hardening of the vessel, from
portions of which it is easily detached.” It contained a smaller
urn, both being as usual filled with burned bones. Fig. 677, 3 feet
9 inches in circumference at the neck, has an overlapping rim with a
remarkably elegant outline. Figs. 681, 683, 685, of much the same form
as Fig. 682, have incised lines round the neck, the body of the latter
being covered with a reticulated ornament. Figs. 681 and 683 are of the
same general form, but extremely rich in ornamentation.

  [Illustration: Figs. 676 to 680.--From Drumnakilly, Co. Tyrone.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 681 to 686.--From Drumnakilly, Co. Tyrone.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 687.--From the Giant’s Grave, Loughrey
  Demesne.]

Two unusually fine urns have been brought to my notice by Miss Stokes,
of Carrig Breac, near Dunamase, and are, I believe, now in the R. I.
A. Museum. The larger of the two, which is of the same general form
as the Altegarron urn, Fig. 664, but rather more contracted in the
upper part, has two raised encircling rims around its widest part;
between these the urn is ornamented with a series of diagonal lines
of impressed squares. Round the upper part is a line of curves or
undulations, between elaborate diagonal indented lines as before. The
lower part of the urn has around its upper and lower edges a row of
undulations, and around its centre an encircling border of rude lozenge
formed indentations; the whole of the rest of the surface being covered
with vertical lines of square indentations, same as already described;
these are of the same class as those shown in Figs. 706 and 718. The
other urn in general form of outline resembles the one from Ballon Hill
(Fig. 665); it is richly decorated with encircling bands of herringbone
lines, and three borders, one on its neck and two on the lower part of
chevron ornament.

The pottery found in the Crannogs presents many peculiarities of
pattern. The vessels are considered by Mr. Wakeman, to whom the
antiquarian world is indebted, in many cases, for their discovery,
to be the remains of what have been used for cooking purposes. They
are mostly vessels, sometimes of very large size, wide at the mouth,
contracted in the neck, and gradually, with easy flow of line, tapering
downwards on the sides. Mostly they appear to have had handles at the
top, which take a gradual curve from the rim down to their junction
with the tapering body. They are more or less decorated with punctured,
incised, impressed, or other simple ornaments.

  [Illustration: Fig. 688.]

The general form of these crannog vessels will be best understood on
reference to the accompanying engraving, which is a restored example
from fragments found in a crannog in Drumgay Lake, near Enniskillen,
and carefully described by Mr. Wakeman in the Journal of the Royal
Historical and Archæological Association of Ireland. The lake wherein
this crannog was discovered--the “Loch of Drumgay”--is a picturesque
sheet of water, nearly midway between Enniskillen and the village of
Bellinamallard, in the county of Fermanagh. The examination of these
lake dwellings yielded many highly interesting and important results,
and brought to light several fragments of pottery, and many other
objects of antiquity. Some of the patterns of fictile ornamentation are
shown on the Figs. 691 to 704, which are drawn of one half their real
size. One pattern is a simple chevron; another a punched right-line
ornament, very characteristic of this primitive ware; another has a
series of incisions, giving the rim somewhat the effect of a cable
moulding; and another is reticulated, or has what may be described as a
series of saltires, all round the rim.

  [Illustration: Fig. 689.]

Some other excellent examples were yielded by the examination, by Mr.
Wakeman, of a crannog in Ballydoolough[65]--a loch of about twenty-four
acres in extent, a few miles from Enniskillen, not far from the old
road to Tempo. The “lake dwelling” where these fragments were found,
is said to be “one of the most instructive yet discovered in Ireland.”
In it, “among other instructive remains, were found a very large
number of fragments of pottery, along with quantities of bones of _bos
longifrons_, _cervus elephas_, _sus scrofa_, _equus asinus_, and other
animals, including the goat, which gave good testimony to their being
portions of cooking vessels.” A restoration of one of these “crocks”
is given on the accompanying engraving, Fig. 689, and its pattern is
shown of a larger size on Fig. 718. “It measures three feet two inches
round the mouth, and is tastefully ornamented on the rim and sides. The
decoration, which was impressed upon the soft clay before the vessel
was burnt, is extremely like that which appears upon silver bracelets
preserved in the Museum of the Royal Irish Academy, and also found
amongst the Cuerdale hoard.” Its colour is drab, or light yellowish
red, and it is of close texture. The pattern is impressed or indented,
and from its chevron character is undoubtedly early. Several varieties
of this pattern occurred. The next examples exhibit simply a series
of zigzag incisions of precisely the same character as is found on
Celtic cinerary urns. Indeed the decoration of many of these domestic
(?) vessels is exactly identical with that of some of the finest
sepulchral urns found in that country. “It may be said further, that in
the numerous designs found upon the crannog vessels there is not one
that is suggestive of the work of Christian times in Ireland; on the
contrary, the greater portion--chevrons and circular depressions--are
expressive of pagan ideas of ornamental art. The log-house at
Ballydoolough is almost precisely of the same size and of the same
style of construction as the celebrated dwelling described by Captain
Mudge in the ‘Archæologia,’ in which was found a stone hatchet.” These
crannog vessels must not, therefore, be assigned to a later period than
pagan times.

  [Illustration: Fig. 690.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 691 to 704.]

Some other examples from this crannog are of extreme interest.
The “fragment, Fig. 719, bears upon its ear,” says Mr. Wakeman,
“two figures somewhat like a St. Andrew’s Cross, but which here, I
apprehend, need not be regarded as a Christian symbol. Such figures
have been found in Ireland, inscribed on rocks, and upon the walls of
natural or partly artificial caverns, and even within the inclosure
of pagan tumuli, as at Dowth, accompanied in several instances by
‘scorings’ at present unintelligible.” Many appear in the cave of
Lochnacloyduff (the _loch of the dark trench_, or _mound_)
and in the “lettered caves” and the cliffs of Knockmore. These vessels
are “of a dingy brown colour, and their ‘scorings’ are deeply impressed
in what was a paste of unusually gritty matter. It may not be out of
place to state here, once for all, that between the crannog pottery
and the vases found in cairns, and usually styled sepulchral, there
is apparently no difference in style of manufacture. Strange to say,
both classes exhibit the action of fire more strongly upon the interior
than upon the external sides or base. Their colouring upon the whole
is generally similar, varying from a dull red to a dark brown, nearly
black; and in no instance, as far as my observation carries, has
glazing been practised.” (Wakeman.)

  [Illustration: Fig. 705.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 706 to 715.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 716 to 721.]

In another remarkably interesting lake dwelling in Lough Eyes, not
far from Lisbellaw, in the same county of Fermanagh, a variety of
patterns of crocks, along with bones of animals, including the “remains
of _bos longifrons_, or ancient Celtic short-horned ox, of the
red-deer, ass, sheep, goat, and pig,” were found. These were of the
same general form as those already described, and they were more or
less ornamented with indented patterns, sometimes arranged simply
in lines and sometimes in chevron or zigzag designs. It is worthy of
special note too, that several flat discs of the same material as the
crocks were found with them; these were doubtless covers or lids; one
of these is shown on Fig. 703.

A very unusual and clever “provision for the escape of steam during
the process of boiling, or cooking, is observable in several of these
earthen pots. It consists of a small circular hole in the neck or
upper side of the vessel, just below the point where the lid would be
supported or caught;” the lid of course resting on the narrower part
of the neck. Doubtless the contraction of the neck would be formed
for this special purpose. The perforation is shown on the fragments
engraved, Figs. 692 and 716. Figs. 712 and 720 show, very carefully,
two examples of ornamentation on pottery from this crannog; the one
with incisions only, the other with both incisions and impressed
ornaments, the dotted pattern being almost identical with some found in
the lake habitations of Switzerland. The other woodcuts give very clear
representations of other patterns found at Lough Eyes. One of these,
Fig. 706, has both the impressed herringbone and rim patterns; Fig. 700
is simply “notched” on its edge; Fig. 701 has a series of incisions or
“thumb-nail” indentations; Figs. 691 and 699 have the zigzag pattern;
and Fig. 694 a series of lozenge-formed indentations. Figs. 715 and
717 are among the most pronounced examples of herringbone or zigzag
patterns which these lake dwellings have produced, and they are, as
the engravings show, exact counterparts, in appearance, character,
and style, with that which forms so marked a characteristic of Celtic
sepulchral urns of one kind or other.

During mediæval times the pottery of Ireland was much of the same
coarse kind as described under “England” in the first volume; but
little, however, is known concerning either its localities of
manufacture or its general characteristics. Wood (both platters and
noggins) and pewter appear to have been in much more general use for
domestic purposes than earthenware, and the manufacture of the latter
was consequently very small. Later on, manufactories of a finer kind of
ware were established in Belfast, Dublin, and other places; of these
but very meagre particulars are known.


                                DUBLIN.

_Delamain._--A manufactory of delft-ware existed here in the Strand, in
the early and middle part of last century. Before 1753 the manufactory
had passed into the hands of Captain Henry Delamain, who, as stated by
himself, “when the delft manufactory in this city [Dublin] failed,”
“being convinced that it might be carried on greatly to the advantage
of this nation, took said manufactory into his hands, built workhouses
and kilns, erected a mill to grind flint and metals,” and so forth. In
that year he appears to have had as a confidential manager Mr. William
Stringfellow, who probably had either been the previous owner of the
manufactory or one of the “most knowing persons” of those works. In the
year referred to Capt. Delamain petitioned the Irish House of Commons
for assistance in carrying out his undertaking. His case was thus
stated:

                “A.D. 1761. 1st November. Geo. II.[66]

   “A Petition of HENRY DELAMAIN the Younger, of the
   City of Dublin, Gentleman, Setting forth:--that when the
   Delft Manufactory in this City failed, the petitioner being
   convinced that it might be carried on greatly to the advantage
   of this Nation, took said Manufactory into his hands, built
   Workhouses and Kilns, erected a mill to grind flint and Metals,
   and discharged debts affecting the old Manufactory, and also
   supported the most knowing persons that were employed at the old
   Manufactory, while his new one was building, to prevent their
   leaving the Kingdom; and purchased the Art of Printing Earthen
   Ware with as much Beauty, Strong Impression, and Dispatch as
   it can be done on paper. That the Petitioner lived above 20
   years abroad, where he acquired a knowledge in the Manufactures
   of Delft and Earthen Ware and having taken a Circuit thro’
   this Kingdom found that every Province therein is furnished
   with proper Materials for making thereof. That the Petitioner
   after many repeated experiments has discovered the secrets of
   Glazing Delft Ware with Coals, and Painting and Glazing Flint
   Ware. That the petitioner employs upwards of 40 families in his
   Manufactory, and proposes taking a number of Charter School
   Boys apprentice, by which means he will be able to supply New
   Manufactories with Artists; and the petitioner is willing not
   only to communicate all the secrets of his business to any one
   setting them up, but also to assist them in the construction of
   their kilns, &c. That the petitioner laid Specimens of the Wares
   made by him before the Dublin Society, who were of opinion that
   they were as good, and some of them better than any imported
   into Ireland; and found on Experiments made, that they stood
   boiling water without breaking or Cracking; and as it can be
   made near 20 per cent. cheaper than it can be imported, he
   apprehends a great benefit will arise, not only by preventing
   large sums from going out of the Kingdom for said Manufactures,
   but also by exporting it to Foreign Markets, and praying aid to
   enable him to carry on the said Manufactory, was presented to
   the House and read.

         “_Ordered to be reported on by Sir Arthur Gore and a
                             Committee._”

   “Sir A. Gore reported that the Committee considered the
   Allegations proved, and that the Petitioner deserved
   encouragement.[67]

                 “_Referred to Committee of Supply._”

   “Resolved, That it is the opinion of this Committee that a sum
   of £1000 be given to HENRY DELAMAIN the Younger, Manufacturer
   of Earthen Ware, for his encouragement, and to enable him more
   effectually to carry on the said Manufacture.”[68]

In the same year, 1753, Delamain having discovered a way to use coal
instead of wood in the manufacture of earthenware, applied to the
English Parliament for compensation for making his invention public.
From the Journal of the House it appears his petition, wherein he is
described as “Henry Delamain, gentleman,” was read on the 21st of
January, 1754, and referred to a Committee, where, however, the whole
matter seems to have ended. In it he says that “he has discovered a
method of firing kilns of a particular construction,” “which perfectly
burn and glaze all sorts of white ware with coal in less time and in
larger quantities than the method now practised by burning of wood,
and at one-third of the expense.” In a not very honourable letter,
printed by Owen, Delamain speaks of his intention of applying to
“the Parliament of England for a reward for having burnt and glazed
delft-ware with coals,” instead of wood or turf. In this letter
Delamain writes to Stringfellow that he has seen the Liverpool potters
and told them of the success of his plan, and he desires him to write
how well he has succeeded with the coal; he says, even “suppose it
has happened quite the reverse, do you write what I desire you, for
your own advantage as well as my credit; for I have set them all on
fire to burn their ware with coals, and have come to this agreement
with them, that you are to come over to build their kilns, for which
they will pay you handsomely.” And again he says, “by all means answer
to them by return of post all you can say in its favour, and more if
necessary.” The letter is addressed, “to Mr. Wm. Stringfellow, at the
Delft Manufactory, on the Strand, Dublin,” and dated 19th of December,
1753. Another letter, addressed to his wife, “Mrs. Mary Delamain, at
the India Warehouse, Abbey Street, Dublin,” by Capt. Delamain, is to
the same effect, and runs as follows:--

    “_To Mrs. Mary Delamain, at the India Warehouse, Abbey Street,
                               Dublin._

                                  Tuesday, Liverpool [Jany.] 18th, 1753.

    “My D^r Poll,

   “Inclos’d I send you a letter to Mr. Stringfellow the purport
   of it is to desire him by all means to answer some letters that
   will be wrote to him this night from Liverpoole to know how our
   large kiln has turned out; send for him on the rec^t of this and
   right or wrong beg of him to write it was burnt twice before I
   left Ireland and once since, and that it succeeds so well that
   not a bit of ware was smoked and that it Glazes the Ware better
   than Turf and Wood & makes it harder, less subject to peel,
   and that about two Tun or 2 and a half of coals will burn it
   off, give him this letter for fear he s^d forget writing them
   all the above particulars, let him write the night he receives
   mine, for as soon as his letter arrives at Liverpoole the Mayor
   Corporation and all the Potters will joyne in a petition for me
   to parliament & they will give Mr. Stringfellow a handsome some
   of money to build them kilns. I go to London this day and shall
   call in my way at Worster to see the fine new China Manufactory.”

To Delamain, doubtless, belonged the credit of introducing the use of
coal in the manufacture of earthenware, and he deserved the recognition
he sought, but did not succeed in obtaining, for his invention from the
English Parliament. In 1755 Capt. Delamain received from the Dublin
Society a grant or “bounty” of £1,100, which he expended in furthering
his manufacture.

Capt. Delamain died on the 10th of January, 1757, and his death is
thus curiously recorded in the _Belfast News Letter_ of that period.
“Dublin, January 15th:” “Monday last, died, universally lamented by
all true lovers of their country, Captain Henry Delamain, formerly
in the Duke of Saxe-Gotha’s service, Master of the Irish Delft Ware
Manufactory, who, by the expense of a large fortune and unwearied
application, brought that ware to such perfection as totally to prevent
the enemies of our country, the French, from draining large sums
yearly from this country for Burgundy and Roan ware. Mary Delamain,
his widow, carries on said manufactory and hopes for the continuance
of the friendship of the nobility, gentry, and whole kingdom.” On the
9th of November, 1759, Mrs. Delamain, his widow, petitioned the Irish
House of Commons for further assistance to enable her to carry on and
extend the business, but nothing seems to have been done for her. Mrs.
Delamain, who survived her husband three years, died in March, 1760,
her death being recorded in the Dublin _Public Gazetteer_ of that date:
“Tuesday last died Mrs. Mary Delamain, widow of the late Captain Henry
Delamain, who was the first that brought the earthenware manufacture
to perfection in this kingdom; and since his decease his said widow
(endowed with all the virtues of a good Christian, tender parent, and
sincere friend,) continued it with such advantage to the purchasers as
to prevent the further importation of foreign wares,” &c. In 1763 the
executors of Mrs. Delamain petitioned the Irish House of Commons for a
further grant. The petition contains many interesting particulars, and
is as follows:--

                  “A.D. 1761. 6th November. Geo. III.

   “A Petition of SAMUEL WILKINSON and _William Delamain_,
   Esq^{res}. Executors of Mary Delamain, late of the City of
   Dublin, Earthen-Ware Manufacturer, was presented to the House
   and read, Setting forth, That the late Henry Delamain erected a
   Manufactory for Making of Earthen-Ware in which he discovered
   the Art of burning with Coal instead of Wood, and brought it to
   such Perfection as not only to excel any thing of the kind ever
   attempted in this Kingdom before, but to equal the best Foreign
   Ware imported: in which he expended his entire Fortune to the
   amount of £6,000, and upwards, as appeared to a Committee of the
   late Parliament who were appointed to take his Petition into
   consideration.

   “That in the Session 1753, the House of Commons did grant him
   £1,000 as an encouragement for carrying on said Manufacture,
   and the Dublin Society upon Inspection had, and Satisfaction
   received of his having expended said Bounty in the Improvement
   of said Manufacture, did in the year 1755 confer a further
   Bounty on him of £1,100, which sum was also expended with the
   best Economy, in improving said Manufacture. That on the Decease
   of said HENRY DELAMAIN, his late WIDOW, MARY DELAMAIN, carried
   on said Manufacture with Great Success, and declined troubling
   Parliament in Session 1757, assured that the Manufacture would
   support itself: but finding that the export of the Ware to
   Foreign Markets was prevented by the continuance of the War,
   she, the said MARY, Petitioned in the Session of 1759, praying
   the further Sanction of Parliament, and Proved the Allegations
   of her Petition; but in that Session no money was granted to
   Private Petitions.

   “That the Petitioners, since the Decease of said MARY DELAMAIN,
   have carried on the same Manufacture, for the advantage of
   the orphans of the said HENRY and MARY, in particular, and of
   the Nation in General, with so much success as to prevent the
   Import of Foreign Ware, which Annually carried out of this
   Country above £10,000 to France, and have supplied Dealers in
   every principal Seaport of this Kingdom. That Petitioners by
   commencing on a Small Stock are disabled of purchasing Coal and
   other Materials in the proper Season requisite for carrying
   on the Work, and lowering the price of the Ware, or employing
   between 2 and 300 of the poor Natives which the Apparatus is
   equal to; and on a Peace, of exporting to Foreign Markets about
   £20,000 worth every year, over and above the Home Consumption;
   and therefore praying the House to take their Case into
   Consideration, and to grant such assistance and relief as shall
   seem meet.

                   “_Referred to a Committee._”[69]

A similar petition appears to have been presented by the same parties
on 9th Nov., 1763, and was referred to a Committee, but no votes in
either case seem to have been taken.


                                DUBLIN.

_Donovan._--Whether Mr. Donovan, of Poolbeg Street, on the Quay,
Dublin, was a manufacturer or not is uncertain, but I believe not. He
purchased both English and Continental wares in the white and decorated
them in his own place. He amassed a large fortune and purchased estates
in Sussex. In his business he was usually known in Dublin as “The
Emperor of China.” “About 1790 he had a glass manufactory at Ringsend,
near Dublin, and he employed a painter to decorate pottery, and placed
all sorts of fancy and imitation marks on china and earthenware.” His
name sometimes occurs as DONOVAN only, and at others as

    _Donovan_  or  DONOVAN
    _Dublin_       DUBLIN.

  [Illustration: _Dublin._

  Fig. 722.]

A mark on Delft ware which has come under my notice is a crowned harp
with the word Dublin. It is quite uncertain to whose make this is to be
ascribed.

Two or three brownware manufactories also existed during last century
at Dublin, and produced all the usual commoner kinds of coarse domestic
vessels.


                               BELFAST.

_Leathes and Smith._--A pottery was established here in the middle
of the seventeenth century by Captain Leathes and Mr. Smith. It is thus
alluded to by William Sacheverell, some time Governor of the Isle of
Man (a descendant of the Sacheverells of Morley, in Derbyshire), who in
1688 made a voyage to I-Columb-Kill, which he printed in his “Survey
of the Isle of Man.” He left Liverpool on the 23rd of June, 1688, on
his way to I-Columb-Kill, and as “it blew very hard for a whole week”
he “took the opportunity of visiting Carrick Fergus and Bellfast,” and
stayed in the latter two nights, being thither invited by “the Earl of
Dunagall, whither he was going with the Earl of Orrery and the Lord
Dungannon.” “Bellfast,” he says, “is the second town in Ireland, well
built, full of people, and of great trade. The quantities of butter
and of beef which it sends into foreign parts are almost incredible; I
have seen the barrels piled up in the very streets. The new pottery is
a pretty curiosity, set up by Mr. Smith, the present sovereign, and his
predecessor, Captain Leathes, a man of great ingenuity;” and, again,
“Captain Leathes, who was chief magistrate of Belfast, and reputed a
man of great integrity.” The pottery is also spoken of at a later date,
1708, by Dr. Molyneux, in his MS. tour to the Giant’s Causeway. “Here,”
at Belfast, he says, “we saw a very good manufacture of earthenware,
which comes nearest to delft of any made in Ireland, and really is not
much short of it. It is very clear and pretty, and universally used in
the north; and, I think, not so much owing to any peculiar happiness in
the clay, but rather to the manner of beating and mixing it up.” The
works were continued for very many years, and produced much useful ware
of good quality.

  [Illustration:

      M
    H * R
    _1724_]

The curious example of Belfast pottery engraved on Fig. 723 is highly
interesting as bearing the name of Belfast and the date 1724. It is
a “choppine,” or lady’s high-heeled shoe, and is in Delft ware. It
is six inches in length and the heel is two inches in height, and is
decorated in blue and white, the flowers and foliage being blue on a
white and white on a blue ground. On the sole are the initials M H R, M
being the surname and H and R the Christian names of husband and wife,
with the name and date in writing “Belfast, 1724,” as shown on the
engraving. These are painted under the glaze in blue. For the notice of
this interesting example, in the possession of a lady in Belfast, to
whose grandmother it formerly belonged, I am indebted to Mr. Benn, the
historian of that town.

  [Illustration: Fig. 723.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Coates’ Pottery._--On an old map of Belfast, published in 1791, a
building marked as “Coates’ Pottery” occurs. This, it is recorded by
Mr. Pinkerton, was “set up by Mr. Victor Coates, at Lagan village, long
before he established the well-known foundry at the same place. Red
ware and a coarse kind of delft were made.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_China Works._--On the same map of Belfast, engraved in 1791, just
referred to, occurs a building marked “China Manufactory,” close by
“Coates’ Pottery,” “The partners in this Belfast china manufactory,”
says Mr. Pinkerton, “were Thomas Gregg, Samuel Stephenson, and John
Ashmore. That they carried on the manufacture of china there for some
years is certain; for on January 29, 1793, the Earl of Hillsborough
presented a petition from them to the Irish House of Commons. The
original petition may be seen in the Journals of the House. In it the
petitioners state that, recognising the great advantages arising from
a manufacture of Queen’s Ware, and other fine kinds of ware such as
are made in Staffordshire, they united themselves into a company for
producing such wares in Ireland, and by their exertions had carried
this manufacture to a greater perfection in the County of Down, near
Belfast, than was ever known in this kingdom; that they had been at
great expenses in erecting buildings, and importing machinery, and
in bringing workmen from foreign places; that the difference in the
prices of coal between Belfast and Staffordshire had greatly exceeded
their expectations, and they now prayed for pecuniary aid. A committee,
consisting of the Earl of Hillsborough, Mr. Johnson, and others, was
immediately appointed by the House to report on the petition; and on
the 2nd of February they reported that the petitioners had fully proved
their allegations. The report was then ordered to be laid on the table;
but it does not appear that anything was done further in the matter.


                   FLORENCE COURT, COUNTY FERMANAGH.

There is a manufactory at this place where common red ware is made.
The products are chiefly flower-pots and the coarser kinds of domestic
vessels.


                        COAL ISLAND, DUNGANNON.

At this manufactory only the coarser kinds of fire-clay and terra-cotta
goods--chimney-pots, flower-pots, vases, &c., are produced.


                               YOUGHAL.

There was a manufactory of brown ware, for pitchers and common goods,
at this place. It was of old foundation.


                                LARNE.

_Larne Pottery._--Pottery works were, I am informed by Mr. Patterson,
built close to the small sea-port of Larne, county of Antrim, by James
Agnew, Esq., the proprietor of the estate, and were worked under the
management of his agent, Mr. Walker, from about 1850 to 1855, and
afterwards for two or three years by the Greenock Pottery Company,
since which time the works have been closed. The buildings still
remain, but lie vacant. The goods produced were white and printed
earthenware, cane ware, Rockingham tea-pots, and brown pans, crocks,
and dairy and kitchen utensils of various kinds. Some of the latter
named were made from local clays, and were very good of their kind.
Their rubbish heaps are on the borders of Larne Lough, and the beach
is strewed with fragments of pottery, the little triangular supports,
saggars, &c.


                         CASTLE ESPIE POTTERY.

At Castle Espie, near Comber, county of Down, Mr. Samuel Minland, J.P.,
some years ago, I am informed by Mr. Patterson, established brick and
tile works. Common pottery is now manufactured there from the local red
clay. The brown glazed ware consists of dairy vessels, tea-pots, flower
vases, and other plain household articles.

  [Illustration: Figs. 724 and 725.]

Captain Beauclerc, at the exhibition of 1851, exhibited two terra-cotta
vases, his own modelling, made in Ireland, of Irish material. They were
engraved in the “Art Journal Illustrated Catalogue,” page 257, and are
here reproduced, Figs. 724 and 725. The productions were in two tints;
the body of each vase being of a deep red, and the figures of a lighter
and much yellower clay.


                               BELLEEK.

The village of Belleek, county Fermanagh, Ireland, is situated on the
banks of the river Erne, near the borders of Donegal and Fermanagh
and on the outskirts of the Donegal highlands. It has a station on the
Enniskillen and Bundoran line; which line communicates with Dublin,
Belfast, and the various other lines of the kingdom. Belleek is within
three miles of Ballyshannon; six of Bundoran; four of Lough Melvin,
renowned for its salmon and trout fishery, and especially famous
for the _Gillaroo_ trout. It is also within short distances of
Pettigo, Garrison, Devenish Island, with its monastic ruins and a
perfect round tower, the beautiful park and grounds of Castle Caldwell,
and many other objects of attraction.

  [Illustration: Fig. 726.--The Belleek China Works.]

The manufactory, a view of which is given on Fig. 726, stands on a
small island in a bend of the river Erne. Near the bridge is a large
water-wheel, over 100-horse power, which gives motion to grinding-pans,
lathes, turning-plates, and all the varied and skilfully designed
apparatus of the works. “In the interior, the factory bears all the
appearance of business and bustle. Enormous grinding-pans, in which the
raw material is prepared for the hands of the artisan, rumble and roar,
driven by the irresistible and constant power of the large water-wheel;
the furnaces of the great ovens, in which the moulded clay is baked,
roar by the draught caused by their great height; while in the
workshops the lathes and turning plates whiz noiselessly round, as the
soft, putty-like clay is being deftly moulded by the skilled workman
into many beautiful designs.”

The works at Belleek were established in 1863 by the present
proprietors, Messrs. David McBirney and Robert Williams Armstrong.
Before the establishment of the works, trials were made with the
felspar of the Irish locality with ordinary Cornish china clay, at the
Royal Porcelain Works at Worcester. The results were so satisfactory
that Mr. Armstrong, who at that time was architect to the proprietor,
laid the project for forming a manufactory at Belleek before his
friend, Mr. David McBirney of Dublin, a gentleman well known for his
energy in aiding any movement to advance the prosperity of Ireland,
and he embarked with him in the attempt to produce first-class ceramic
goods in Ireland. The firm, composed of these two gentlemen, trade
under the style of “D. MCBIRNEY & CO.” There are now employed
at the Works about two hundred “hands,” among whom are several skilled
artists; the Art director being the founder and proprietor, Mr.
Armstrong.

The chief peculiarities of the ornamental goods produced at Belleek
are, its lightness of body, its rich, delicate, cream-like, or
ivory tint, and the glittering iridescence of its glaze. “Although
the principal productions hitherto have been formed of this white
ware--which either resembles the finest biscuit (of Buen Retiro or
Dresden), or almost the ivory of the hippopotamus, or shines with a
lustre like that of nacre--local clays have been found which yield
jet, red, and cane-coloured wares. Facsimiles of sea shells, and
of branches of coral, which might well be supposed to be natural,
are among the principal features. The iridescent effect produced is
somewhat similar to that of the ruby lustre of the famous Gubbio
Majolica; that Italian enamelled ware which commands such fabulous
prices, and of which an unrivalled collection is to be seen at the
South Kensington Museum. Lustres were introduced many years ago for
English pottery by Hancock, by Gardner, and by Stennys; and in the
booths of our country fairs, rude inartistic forms, glowing with a gold
or a silver lustre, are often to be seen. The effect of a good lustre
may be compared to that of “shot silk,” or to the changing hues that
adorn the neck of a black or dark blue pigeon, or the crested pride
of a drake. Oil of turpentine, flour of sulphur, gold solution, and
tin solution, constitute the gold glaze, the purple hue being due to
the tin. Platinum, and spirits of tar enter, with oxide of zinc, into
the composition of the silver lustre. But neither of these glazes, any
more than the Italian enamel of which the secret was lost so long ago
as the sixteenth century, can compare with the beauty of the Belleek
ware, an idea of which can only be given by recalling the beautiful
hues of a highly-polished mother-of-pearl shell. We can convey no
idea of it by engravings; and it seems equally difficult to do so by
written description. We may apply to it the common-place expression:
‘It must be seen to be admired;’ and certainly it must be examined to
be estimated. We can, however, with some degree of accuracy, represent
some of the forms produced by this manufactory.”[70] Fig. 727 is the
grounds-basin of a tea-service, made for the Queen (Her Majesty being
one of the early patrons of the Belleek Pottery), and presented by
her to the present Empress of Germany. The basis of the design is the
_echinus_ or sea-urchin, which abounds on the coast of Donegal,
and has, both the native and rarer foreign species, been utilised by
the firm in many of their productions. In this instance it forms the
bowl, and the supports are branches of coral.

  [Illustration: Fig 727.--Grounds-Basin: for the Queen’s Service.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 728.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 729 to 731.]

Besides the “Royal” services--breakfast, dessert, and tea--made
for her Majesty, other services have been made for H.R.H. the Prince
of Wales, and others of the royal family. From the Prince of Wales’s
services the engravings, Figs. 732 to 735 are selected.

  [Illustration: Fig. 732.--Ice-Pail: for the Prince of Wales.]

Fig. 732 is the ice-pail. The base is formed of three exquisitely
modelled mermaids, in Parian, who support the shell-formed base of
the vase, around which a group of Tritons and dolphins in high relief
are sporting in the water, with an effective background of aquatic
plants. A wreath of coral surrounds the rim. The effect of the charming
contrast between the dead and the iridescent surfaces is heightened by
gilding the conches of the revellers. The cover or lid is as it were
the boiling surging sea, from which three sea-horses have partially
risen, and in the centre a Triton, riding on a dolphin, forms the
handle.

  [Illustration: Fig. 733.--Compotier: for the Prince of Wales.]

Fig. 733 is a compotier, whose base represents the surface of the
sea, upon which float three _cardium_ shells. From between these
spring up three small sea-horses, not, indeed, the _hippocampi_ of the
naturalist, but those of the mythologist, the figures which, in antique
gems and in Italian paintings, are intended to serve as the artistic
embodiment of the roll and the dash of the breaker. A trumpet-shell
forms the central column, which, in its turn, supports the shell that
serves as a fruit-dish.

The tall centre-piece (Fig. 734) is designed on a more ambitious
scale. A triton or merman is blowing a conch; a mermaid is wringing
and dressing her redundant locks; and a sea-horse dashes through
the spray. Between these figures, which thus divide the base
into three compartments, are placed three shells of the species
_hippopus maculata_, which form convenient receptacles for bonbons,
candied fruit, or other smaller delicacies of the dessert-table.
A trumpet-shell is again selected to form the main stem, which is
surrounded with aquatic plants; and three _paludina_ shells are so
introduced as to form suitable vases for sprays of flowers. The
shell-dish, with its beautiful markings and projections, again forms
the cap of the tazza.

  [Illustration: Fig. 734.--Centre-piece: for the Prince of Wales.]

The low compotier (Fig. 735) are modelled _en suite_; the idea of
the entire service being that of the combination of natural objects,
selected for their appropriate shape, and for their beauty of form or
of sculpture, with imaginary forms. The shells which are modelled for
the dishes are supported by conventional dolphins.

The tazza vase and pedestal (Fig. 736), on which hangs a wreath of
flowers, dependent from rams’ heads, is a fine specimen of Irish art.

Our next engraving (Fig. 737) is a flower-stand composed of shells
supported by dolphins, and is so iridescent as to have almost an
unearthly appearance of liquid beauty.

  [Illustration: Fig. 735.--Low Compotier: for the Prince of Wales.]

“The reproduction of natural forms by Ceramic Art,” says the _Art
Journal_, “is not by any means a novelty. We are familiar with the
fish, the reptiles, and the crustacea of Bernard Palissy, with the
relieved and coloured foliage of Luca and of Andrea della Robbia.
In England we have seen the shells reproduced by the artists of the
Plymouth china, and the delicate leaves and flowers of the old Derby
ware. The designer of much of the Belleek ware has the merit, so far
as we are aware, of being the first artist who has had recourse to
the large sub-kingdom of the _radiata_ for his types. The animals
that constitute this vast natural group are, for the most part,
characterized by a star-shaped or wheel-shaped symmetry; and present
a nearer approach to the verticillate structure of plants, than to
the bilateral balance of free locomotive animals. For, at all events
a portion of their existence, indeed, most of the _radiata_ are fixed
to the earth. The five-fold radiation, which is most common among
dicotyledonous plants, is the usual division assumed by these zoophytic
creatures. From the globular shape of the commonest _echinus_, or
sea-urchin, through the flattened and depressed form of others of
the family, the transition is regular and gradual, to the well-known
five-fingered star-fish, and to those wonderfully branched and foliated
forms which shatter themselves into a thousand fragments when they are
brought up by the dredge from deep water and exposed for a moment to
the air. Under the name of _frutti di mare_, these sea-eggs, covered
as they are with innumerable pink and white spines, form a favourite
portion of the diet of the southern Italians. When the spines, by
which the creature moves, are stripped off, the projections and
depressions of the _testa_, or shell, are often marked by great beauty
of pattern; and it would have been hardly possible to bring into the
service of plastic art a more appropriate group of natural models.
Again, in the fantastic and graceful forms of the mermaid, the nereid,
the dolphin, and the sea-horse, the Belleek art-designer has attained
great excellence of ideality; the graceful modelling is set off, with
the happiest effect, by the contrast between the dead, Parian-like
surface of the unglazed china, and the sparkling iridescence of the
ivory-glazed ground.”

  [Illustration: Fig. 736.--Flower Tazza and Pedestal.]

The productions of the Belleek works comprise all the usual
services--dinner, breakfast, tea, dessert, and toilet--in large variety
of patterns and of various styles of decoration, and in addition to
these a vast variety of ornamental goods are produced. Figures and
groups of figures, animals, &c., are also made, and are characterized
by excellent modelling and judicious colouring--the peculiar Belleek
glaze imparting to them a beauty all their own. Boudoir candlesticks
and other choice examples of art also evidence considerable skill on
the part of the artists in the modelling of the flowers and foliage and
in the arrangement of the wreaths.

Among the choicest examples of actual manipulative skill produced by
any manufactory are some cabinet cups and saucers, the extreme delicacy
of which far surpasses the ordinary “egg-shell” china. The cup itself
is the _echinus_, and the saucer is also tastefully modelled from
the same; the body is so thin, and worked to such a degree of nicety,
as to be of little more than the thickness of common writing paper.
This delicate body, either plain, or tinted and gilt and then glazed
with the iridescent glaze so characteristic of the Belleek ware, is
unique in its appearance and matchless in its extreme delicacy. Of the
same filmy body _cardium_ and other shells are also produced, and
are exquisitely tinted.

  [Illustration: Fig. 737.--Boudoir Flower Shells.]

Besides the speciality of these works (the “Belleek China”) Messrs.
McBirney and Armstrong manufacture to a large extent white granite
ware services of every variety, and of excellent quality both in body,
in glaze, and in printed, painted, enamelled, and gilt decorations.
Many of the patterns are of more than average excellence, and in every
respect the Irish earthenware equals the ordinary commercial classes of
Staffordshire wares. The dinner-ware is especially serviceable, being
a true felspathic body, semi-vitrified, and hence ranking next to the
true porcelain; smooth and admirably potted. The simple ornamentation
to which it has been subjected is pure in style and Art, while the
article competes as to price with inferior ware in the markets of
England and America. Indeed the trade with America is already large,
and is regularly increasing.

Parian and ordinary white china, as well as ivory body, are also
largely made in a vast variety of styles.

Not only in these home essentials is its place established; Belleek
furnishes largely the “porcelain insulators” (containing 70 per cent.
local felspar) used for telegraph poles, and these have been pronounced
by “authorities” the best. In pestles and mortars the factory has
considerable trade, and of the minor articles of patch-boxes, &c.,
there is enormous produce. For supremacy in these objects it is
indebted to the purity of the clay and felspar, producing a clear
brilliant white, and singular “compactness,” resulting in remarkable
hardness and durability. In sanitary ware, cabinet-stands, plug-basins,
and other articles, form a staple part of the trade of these works.

The marks used by the Belleek Company are the following:

  [Illustration: BELLEEK CO. FERMANAGH.

  Figs. 738 and 739.]




                             CHAPTER XIII.

   Early Pottery of Scotland--Cinerary Urns--Mediæval
   Pottery--Glasgow--Delft Ware--Verreville Pottery--Garnkirk
   Works--Gartcosh Works--Heathfield Pottery--Glasgow
   Pottery--North British Pottery--Saracen Pottery--Port
   Dundas Pottery Company--Hyde Park Potteries--Britannia
   Pottery--Annfield Pottery--Bridgeton Pottery--Barrowfield
   Pottery--Coatbridge--Glenboig Star Works--Glenboig Fire-Clay
   Works--Cardowan and Heathfield Works--Paisley--Ferguslie
   Works--Shortroods and Caledonia Works--Paisley
   Earthenware Works--Crown Works--Grangemouth--Fire-brick
   Works--Greenock--Clyde Pottery--Dumbarton--Rutherglen--Caledonia
   Pottery--Portobello--Midlothian Potteries--Portobello
   Pottery--Kirkcaldy--Sinclairtown Pottery--Kirkcaldy
   Pottery--Gallatown Pottery--Boness--Boness Pottery--Prestonpans
   Pottery--Alloa--Alloa Pottery--The Hebrides.


                               SCOTLAND.

The early pottery of Scotland appears, as a general rule, to bear a
close analogy to that of England both in form, in intention of use,
and in ornamentation. The cinerary urns, the food and other vessels,
and the immolation urns, all bear a marked resemblance to those of the
sister country, and lead one to the inference that the same feelings,
habits, and customs obtained in the one nation as the other. A cinerary
urn found on the Hill of Tuack is of identical shape and pattern of
ornament with the one engraved on Fig. 15 of Vol. I., while others
bear an equally strong resemblance to others already engraved. To
Professor Wilson the antiquarian world is indebted for much valuable
information concerning the early pottery of Scotland, and to his
important and standard work, the “Pre-Historic Annals of Scotland,”[71]
it owes most of the knowledge it possesses of this, and other important
branches of national history. “It is altogether impossible,” says the
learned Professor, “within the limited amount of accurately observed
facts with which the Scottish archæologist has to deal, to picture
and classify into distinct periods the pottery found in the ancient
tumuli and cairns. Many of the fictilia are so devoid of art as to
furnish no other sign of advancement in their constructors from the
most primitive state of barbarism, than such as is indicated by the
piety which provided a funeral pyre for their dead, and even so rude
a vase, wherein their ashes might be inurned.... The rudimentary
form of the true cinerary urn is that of the common flower-pot, still
retained as the easiest and simplest into which the plastic clay can be
modelled.... From this simple shape was gradually developed the varying
forms both of sepulchral and domestic pottery found deposited with the
dead; inurning the sacred ashes and the costly tributes of affectionate
reverence, or placed in the grave with offerings of food and drink
designed to sustain the deceased on his final journey to the world of
spirits.” Fig. 740 is of this form and is almost identical with the
English example Fig. 15, Vol. I. It is from the Hill of Tuack, near
Kintore, in Aberdeenshire, and was found in the usual inverted position
close to one of the monoliths of the stone circle at the place. Another
of the same form, Fig. 741, ornamented with impressed dots and incised
herringbone pattern, was dug up in 1855 on the farm of Belhelvie, in
Fifeshire. It was 4 feet 6 inches in circumference at the mouth, and
when perfect must have been about 2 feet in height. When found it was,
as is commonly the case, inverted, as shown in the engraving, and was
imperfect. Another fine example is engraved on Fig. 742. It measures
thirteen and a half inches in height, and was dug up at the Ha’ Hill
of Montblairy, in Banffshire. It bears a marked resemblance to many
English examples, both in general form and in ornamentation; it bears
encircling lines of herringbone or zigzag ornament.

  [Illustration: Fig. 740.--From the Hill of Tuack, near Kintore.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 741.--From Belhelvie, Fifeshire.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 742.--From the Ha’ Hill, Montblairy.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 743 to 745.--From Banchory, and Arthur’s
  Seat, Edinburgh.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 746 and 747.--From Memsie and Rathbo.]

Figs. 743 to 745 are of different form, the two larger being probably
food vessels, and the latter an “immolation urn.” The first two were
found in a cist on a farm at Banchory, in Kincardineshire, along
with an interment by inhumation, and the latter at Arthur’s Seat, in
Edinburgh. In the next engravings, Figs. 746 and 747, the larger vessel
was found in a tumulus at Memsie, in Aberdeenshire, and the smaller at
Rathbo, near Edinburgh. Figs. 748 to 750 are three interesting vessels
from Lesmurdie, in Banffshire, now in the Museum of the Society of
Antiquaries of Scotland. The largest is eight inches in height, and the
smallest five inches. Fig. 751 was found in one of a group of cists,
under a large cairn, at Sheal Loch, in the parish of Borthwick, near
Edinburgh. It is made of fine baked clay, burned to an unusually hard
and durable consistency, and measures four and a half inches in height
by about six and a half in diameter. Five perforated projections are
disposed at nearly equal distances around it, and the interior of the
vessel bears evident marks of fire. Fig. 752 is from the Montrose
Museum and was found in that burgh some years back. The other three,
Figs. 753 to 755, are “immolation urns,” as I have before termed
them, which are respectively from Old Penrith, from Dunbar, and from
Ronaldshay in Orkney.

  [Illustration: Figs. 748 to 750.--From Lesmurdie.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 751.--From Sheal Loch.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 752.--From Montrose.]

During Scoto-Roman times, pottery, there can be no reasonable doubt,
was made in Scotland, and many examples that have been brought to
light are evidently native manufacture; there are, however, no
marked peculiarities belonging to them. Of a later period, “the
last pagan period in Scotland,” according to Professor Wilson, some
remarkable glazed urns were found, one at East Langton, the other
in Aberdeenshire. They were found in stone cists by the sides of
skeletons, and were “of rough grey ware, ornamented externally with
parallel grooves running round them, and internally covered with a
green glaze.” They appear originally to have had “two projecting
ears opposite each other, which fitted into corresponding double
ones attached to a lid, by which the vessel, when found, was closely
covered; and the whole of the projections were perforated to admit a
pin which completed the fastening.” (See Figs. 757, 758.)

  [Illustration: Figs. 753 to 755.--From Dunbar, Old Penrith, and
  Ronaldshay.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 756.--From Penicuik.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 757.--From East Langton.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 758.--From Aberdeenshire.]

As of the primitive so of the mediæval pottery of Scotland; it differs
but little from that of England, and indeed, except in a few instances,
cannot be distinguished from it. Pitchers of the usual form, perforated
jugs, bowls, dishes and platters--all were pretty nearly identical with
those of English make, and but few seats of manufacture existed. The
wares were of the commonest and coarsest kind. As in Ireland wood was
more generally used than anything else for such utensils.

Of mediæval pottery Figs. 756 to 759 are characteristic examples.
The first of these is a pitcher found in 1792, filled with coins of
Alexander II. of Scotland and Edward I. and Edward II. of England,
near Penicuick House, where it is preserved. It measures three and
three-quarter inches in height, and is perforated at tolerably uniform
distances. It is of coarse unglazed earthenware. Fig. 759 is a mediæval
pitcher found near North Berwick Abbey, in East Lothian; it bears a
marked resemblance to some engraved in Vol. I.

  [Illustration: Fig. 759.]

That china was attempted to be made in Scotland in the middle of last
century is evident from the following paragraph from the _London
Chronicle_ of 1755: “Yesterday four persons, well-skilled in the making
of British china, were engaged for Scotland, where a new porcelain
manufacture is going to be established, in the manner of that now
carried on at Chelsea, Stratford, and Bow.” But nothing is known as to
the locality of the proposed works.


                               GLASGOW.

The first pottery established in Glasgow was, it would appear, founded
in 1749 as a delft-ware works. It was situated near the Broomielaw, in
a lane which was called the “Delft-field Lane.” “Delft-field Lane” is a
very suggestive name, and of course took its origin from the pot-works.
The name was, I am informed by Mr. Cochran, “changed to ‘James Watt
Street’ in later years. The celebrated inventor of the steam-engine
lived in this lane, and it was in one of the rooms of the pottery
that he was in the habit of working at his invention, and it is said,
perfected it. The ware manufactured at this pottery was delft ware,
and was a close imitation of the old grey Dutch ware of that name;
but about the year 1770 the proprietors began to make ‘Queen’s ware,’
or white ware. They also began to make both plain and ornamented
china, of such excellent quality that they received the compliment
of being appointed potters to the Prince of Wales. How long this
pottery lasted I have not been able to ascertain, but it was working
in full perfection in the beginning of the present century. The next
pottery which was built in Glasgow was about the year 1801, when the
“Caledonian Pottery,” on the banks of the Monkland Canal, was erected.
This is the oldest pottery now working in Glasgow, for although
Verreville was built more than twenty years before it, yet earthenware
was not made there till the year 1820.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_Verreville Pottery._--In 1777, as the name implies, the Verreville
Works were built for a glass-house, by a Mr. Cookson, of Newcastle, and
a Mr. Colquhoun, of Glasgow. In 1806 they were sold to the Dumbarton
Glass Work Company, who immediately resold them to Mr. John Geddes,
with this stipulation, that he was not to manufacture crown or bottle
glass. Mr. Geddes carried on the manufacture of flint glass until 1820,
when he commenced making earthenware as well as glass. In 1835 the
works passed into the hands of Mr. Robert Alexander Kidston, who four
years afterwards added the manufacture of china to that of glass and
earthenware.

“He began,” I am told by Mr. Cochran, “by bringing skilled workmen
and artists from the principal seats of china manufacture. Figures,
porcelain basket work and flowers, were produced by workmen who had
acquired their skill in the old and celebrated porcelain works of
Derby, while Coalport and several of the most famous Staffordshire
china works supplied a general staff of potters, together with gilders,
and flower and landscape painters. Mr. Kidston carried on the business
for several years and produced a beautiful porcelain, and upon his
retiring from the business in 1846 was succeeded by the late Mr. Robert
Cochran, who carried on the works with great vigour and success. In
1856 he ceased the manufacture of china, and devoted the whole of the
works to the manufacture of earthenware. Mr. Cochran devoted great
attention and spared no expense in promoting the introduction of
labour-saving machinery. He also made great improvements in the kilns
or ovens in which the earthenware is fired, by which he reduced the
quantity of coal used to nearly one-half. It was applied successfully
in his own works of Verreville and Britannia, but was not adopted by
other manufacturers. This improvement was patented in 1852, and it is
only now that the same principle, with some slight alterations, has
been patented and is likely to be generally adopted by potters. Mr.
Cochran died in 1869, and was succeeded in the Verreville Pottery by
his son, also named Robert Cochran, by whom the works are still carried
on. The goods manufactured are principally for the home trade, and
consist of white, sponged, printed, and enamelled ware. No marks have
ever been used except the initials of the proprietors stamped on the
ware.” Verreville it is said was the first work in Scotland where china
was manufactured.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Illustration: Figs. 760 to 762.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 763.]

_Garnkirk Works._--These works were established about half a century
ago by Messrs. Sprott, by whom--and later by Mr. Mark Sprott--they were
carried on. They are now continued by the trustees of the late Mr. Mark
Sprott (Messrs. Sprott, Gillespie, and Cameron), under the style of the
“Garnkirk Fire Clay Company.” The goods produced at these works are
the ordinary classes of fire-clay and terra-cotta articles, including
ornamental chimney shafts and smoke-valves of good design and excellent
mechanical construction; sanitary pipes and other appliances;
architectural enrichments; garden edgings and balustrades of more than
average beauty in design, of which examples are given in Figs. 760 to
762; garden vases of great variety in design and of different sizes;
fountains, notably an example of five tiers, supported by figures of
dolphins and cranes, with basin twenty-four feet in height and sixteen
feet across, erected in the public park at Aberdeen; busts, statuary,
both single figures and groups, including Baily’s lovely conception of
“Eve at the Fountain,” “Gleaner,” “Minerva,” “Bacchus,” “Atlas,” &c.;
pedestals, brackets, and every other variety of ornamental goods, as
well as fire-clay, bricks, blocks, &c. The markets principally supplied
are the home, and those of France, Germany, Russia, and the East and
West Indies. The mark used is simply the word _Garnkirk_ impressed in
the clay.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Gartcosh Works_ were established by Mr. James Binnie, in 1863,
and have since then been considerably extended. The produce of these
works is terra-cotta vases, tazzas, pedestals, fountains, &c., of
remarkably good design and of fine and durable quality; ornamental and
plain garden edgings; gothic, clustered, and other chimney tops; ridge,
flooring, and roofing tiles; cattle, horse, and dog troughs; copings;
sewage and sanitary pipes of every description; glazed and unglazed
fire bricks, furnace blocks, and all other goods for fire-resisting
purposes. The clay is found about fifty fathoms below the surface,
at Gartcosh; the strata being from eighteen to twenty-five feet in
thickness. It is found underlying large beds of sandstone in what is
called the limestone series, which lies between the upper and lower
coal series of this district. The following is the analysis: silicic
acid or silica, 60·96; alumina, 37·00; peroxide of iron, 1·16; lime,
0·64; magnesia, 0·24; total, 100.00.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Heathfield Pottery._--At these works Messrs. Ferguson, Miller, & Co.
produced some admirable vases in terra cotta, which were shown at the
1851 Exhibition, and are here engraved. One of these (Fig. 764) was a
vase of large size and excellent modelling; it bore a frieze of figures
typical of the great gathering in 1851. Fig. 765 shows, among its other
ornaments, a nuptial procession, designed in the style of the antique;
these figures were modelled with great accuracy, and are arranged in an
artistic manner. The works passed in 1862 into the hands of Messrs.
Young (which see); the moulds, &c., including those of these vases,
became the property of the Garnkirk Company.

  [Illustration: Figs. 764 and 765.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 766 to 769.]

  [Illustration: Fig. 770.]

  [Illustration: Figs. 771 to 781.--Messrs. Bell and Co.’s 1851
  Exhibits.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Glasgow Pottery._--These works were established in 1842, by Messrs. J.
& M. P. Bell & Co., in Stafford Street, Glasgow, for the manufacture
of white and printed earthenware, and soon rose to the first rank
among the potteries of Scotland. Particular attention was from the
first paid not only to the excellence of body of the ware, but to
improvement in form and in style of decoration. In these particulars
they were eminently successful, and in 1851 received honourable
mention at the Great Exhibition. Later on the manufacture of china was
commenced, and later still the fine white and pearl granite wares, and
white and decorated sanitary wares. The works are of great extent, and
produce all the usual varieties of goods in dinner, breakfast, tea,
toilet, dessert, and other services, as well as all the usual classes
of articles, and in every variety of style, from the plain white
or cream colour to the most richly enamelled and gilt patterns. The
earthenware services are of more than average excellence of quality,
and the china, both body and glaze, of superior class. Some of the
dessert plates issued by Messrs. Bell, with hand-painted groups of
flowers and perforated or open-work rims, are equal to most English
makes; while some of the tea services are of tall classic form and
of excellent taste in colour and decoration. In parian Messrs. Bell
& Co. produce some admirable vases with figures in relief, and other
ornamental goods; the quality is far above the average. The old marks
used by the Glasgow Pottery are the following: Fig. 782, an eagle
holding a roll, on which is inscribed the name of the pattern, and,
underneath, the initials of the firm, J. & M. P. B. & Co.; Fig. 783,
the Warwick vase and the name, J. & M. P. BELL & Co. The later marks
are (Fig. 784), a garter bearing the initials of the firm, J. & M. P.
B. & Co., surrounding the trade mark of a bell; the name of the pattern
below. These are all printed on the ware, while another, impressed in
the body, is a bell with the initials J. B. (Fig. 785). Another is a
bell only (Fig. 786).

  [Illustration: Figs. 782 to 786.]

Some of Messrs. Bell & Co.’s exhibits are shown in the engravings Figs.
766 to 781.

       *       *       *       *       *

_North British Pottery._--These works on Dobbies Loan, produce the
ordinary qualities of earthenware goods.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Saracen Pottery._--The Saracen Pottery was established in 1875
by Messrs. Bayley, Murray, and Brammer, at Possilpark. The firm
manufacture Rockingham, cane-coloured, Egyptian black, jet, and
mazarene blue wares on an extensive scale, mostly, in tea-pots, jugs,
and other useful domestic articles, both for the home and foreign
markets. The mark used is the initials of the firm and name of the works

    B M & Co
    SARACEN POTTERY.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Port Dundas Pottery Company._--These works were established for
the manufacture of stoneware articles about the year 1819. In the
earlier years of its existence there were several changes in the
proprietorship, but for the last thirty years it has remained in the
hands of, and been carried on by, Mr. James Miller. The works, from a
somewhat small beginning, have attained considerable proportions. In
1856 they contained three salt-glaze ovens, in which were manufactured
chemical vessels and apparatus of various kinds, spirit bottles, jars,
&c.; and about this time many of the towns in the North of Scotland,
finding the desirability of having a good water supply introduced, had
recourse to high-pressure stoneware water-pipes for that purpose, which
were manufactured in large quantities at these works. Several towns
and many country mansion houses at the present time have their water
supply conducted through miles of the Port Dundas pipes. In the same
year a new glaze was introduced, giving to the ware a cream-coloured
appearance, much purer and cleaner for many purposes than the old brown
salt glaze, and with this a great demand sprang up for stoneware beer
bottles for warm climates, and the works consequently have been greatly
enlarged to meet the increased demand.

By far the greatest portion of ware made in Port Dundas is thrown on
the potter’s wheel, the motive power for which was supplied, until
1866, by girls, who turned a large driving wheel communicating with
a pulley under the workman’s wheelhead by a rope. The proprietor in
that year endeavoured to introduce steam power for this purpose, but
so strong was the opposition of the throwers that the machines and
accompanying shafting, &c., lay aside for three years unused. They
were then erected in a distant part of the works, and apprentices all
but forced to work on them. These, however, had not been long fitted
up when the workmen, seeing the immense advantages to be derived from
their use, gladly availed themselves of the offer of the proprietor to
substitute steam machinery for hand-power throughout the whole factory,
the immediate result of which was to raise the piece-work earnings
of the workmen from 30 to 49 per cent.; they had one attendant less
to pay, a part of whose wages the workman kept to himself, while a
proportion of it was paid to the Company for the use of the steam-power
and up-keep of the machinery. The speed of the wheel requiring to
be varied according to the different operations performed upon it,
is now under the complete control of the workman’s foot, and not as
formerly at the will, or according to the strength of, the assistant
wheel-turner. In this way a complete revolution was quietly effected in
the stoneware potting of Scotland, and the incentive having been given,
orders came from many potteries in England to the Scotch machine maker
for similar steam machines.

With the introduction of the cream-coloured stoneware glaze the ovens
had to undergo extensive alterations, the old salt-glaze cupboard kilns
giving place to much larger sagger ovens, in which the ware is now
burned. The improvement in the appearance of the ware having brought
it into much greater demand, the works rapidly extended, until at the
present time, in the Port Dundas Pottery with its branch work, the
Crown Pottery, there are fifteen ovens in regular operation.

The wares produced are beer, ink, and spirit bottles; preserve, acid,
butter, and druggist’s jars; chemical vessels and apparatus, and every
kind of article made in stoneware, water filters, Rockingham and cane
ware.

All the goods made are stamped with the name of the firm in an oval
stamp.

The home markets are supplied with all descriptions of general
ware, immense quantities of preserve jars, &c. Export bottlers in
Glasgow, Edinburgh, and Liverpool, are supplied with stone bottles.
Water filters, Rockingham, and cane ware are regularly shipped to
the colonies and the continent of Europe. Two years ago a process of
printing on the unfired stoneware body was perfected and patented by
this firm, eminently suitable for consumer’s labels, trade marks, &c.,
no extra firing in the shape of muffle or hardening-in kiln being
required.

The Company exhibited their manufactures at the Chilian Exhibition
held in Santiago in 1875, and there received the first prize gold
medal for the general excellence of their wares. The clay from which
this stoneware is made is obtained only from the Devonshire mines, is
very free from iron, and burns a light buff colour. Somewhere about
10,000 tons are annually used in Glasgow, nearly the whole of which is
brought by sea from the port of Teignmouth to the Clyde. Very little
preparation and no mixing with other ingredients is required before
passing into the hands of the workman; after being milled it is ready
to be fashioned into all kinds of articles. It is also singular in this
respect that the articles are glazed before being burned; and by one
process of firing to a very high pitch of heat--higher than that to
which any other kind of pottery ware is subjected--a hard, vitreous,
and very sonorous ware is produced, glazed inside and out with a
transparent glaze, which allows the buff colour of the clay to be
seen, and which is quite proof against the action of both alkalies and
acids, rendering vessels made by this ware highly suitable for storing
and transporting acids and other chemicals. For many years London and
Bristol were the chief seats of the stoneware trade, and workmen had
to be obtained from the south to carry on business in Scotland; but
apprentices were speedily trained in Glasgow to supply all wants, and
in turn to feed largely the southern potteries. At present there is
more pure stoneware manufactured in Glasgow than anywhere else, so that
it has really become the seat of the stoneware pottery of the kingdom.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Hyde Park Potteries._--This manufactory was established about 1837 by
Mr. John McAdam. His productions are ordinary stoneware bottles, jars,
spirit casks, feet and carriage warmers, pans of various kinds, and all
the ordinary classes of stoneware goods.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Britannia Pottery._--These large works at St. Rollox, Glasgow,
belonging to Messrs. Cochran & Co., produce all the usual varieties of
ordinary earthenware goods in granite and cream-coloured ware for South
America; and printed, enamelled, painted, and gilt wares for the home
markets. The works were established in 1855, by Mr. Robert Cochran, the
senior partner of the Verreville Pottery Company (which see), and the
present partners are Mr. Alexander Cochran (son of the above) and Mr.
James Fleming. The works contain six biscuit and seven glost ovens.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Annfield Pottery._--Messrs. John Thomson and Co., at the Annfield
Pottery, Gallowgate, formerly manufactured both china and earthenware
goods for the home and foreign markets. The works have been closed some
time.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Bridgeton Pottery._--The “Bridgeton Pottery” was built in 1869 by
its present owner, Mr. F. Grosvenor, who for some years previous to
that time had been a partner in the “Caledonian Pottery” at Glasgow.
The goods manufactured are the usual classes of articles in stoneware,
including chemical wares, bottles for various uses, spirit jars,
bottles, &c., and Rockingham ware tea-pots. In 1870 Mr. Grosvenor took
out a patent for the manufacture of bottles and jars by machinery, and
he has also invented an improved bottle stopper.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Barrowfield Pottery._--Established by their present owner, Mr. Henry
Kennedy, in 1866, these extensive works produce in large quantities all
the usual classes of articles of “glass-lined stoneware,” including
“glass-lined bottles and jars” for domestic and other purposes, both
for home and foreign markets. The mark used by Mr. Kennedy is three
Bottles side by side beneath a ribbon bearing the words “Established
1866.”


                              COATBRIDGE.

_Glenboig Star Works._--The Glenboig Star Fire Brick Works produce
bricks, retorts, furnace-blocks and similar goods.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Glenboig Fire-Clay Works._--These works belong to the Glenboig
Fire-Clay Company, and produce sewage and sanitary pipes, &c., retorts,
fire-bricks, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Cardowan and Heathfield Works._--The first of these works, belonging
to Messrs. John Young and Son, was built in 1852 by Messrs. John Hurll
and John Young, previous to that time of the Garnkirk Company. The
clay is the Garnkirk seam, and is of much the same character as the
Stourbridge clay. The Heathfield Works were acquired about 1860 from
Messrs. Miller and Ferguson (which see), and were largely extended and
altered, and improved machinery introduced. The clay was won at 350
feet, passing through a solid bed of freestone of 120 feet, giving off
much water; the seam itself is known as the Glenboig seam of clay, as
it was first wrought at the “Glenboig Works,” with which Mr. Young
was also till quite recently, a partner. At the “Cardowan Works” the
firm manufacture the usual varieties of fire-bricks, blast-furnace
blocks, gas retorts and fittings, vases, garden edgings, and plain
and ornamental chimney shafts. At the “Heathfield Works” they produce
fire-bricks, and vitrified salt-glazed pipes for sewerage and water
purposes, and invert sewer blocks and all the usual salt-glazed
articles. In 1874 Messrs. Hurll and Young dissolved partnership;
Mr. Young, along with his sons John and Robert, being now the sole
proprietors. The product of these works when in full work is about
20,000 fire-bricks per day and about 1,500 yards of pipes weekly.


                               PAISLEY.

_Ferguslie Fire-Clay Works._--These extensive works were established
in 1839, and are carried on by Messrs. Robert Brown and Son. The
productions are mainly chimney shafts in great variety and of good
design, sewage pipes and sanitary goods of all kinds, garden vases and
tazzæ, flower boxes, suspenders, fern and flower stands, &c. of various
designs; statuary, both single figures and groups, architectural
enrichments, pedestals, brackets, garden edgings, fire and other bricks
and tiles, copings, finials, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Shortroods and Caledonia Works._--These are brick and tile works
connected with the Ferguslie Works of Messrs. Robert Brown and Co.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Paisley Earthenware Works._--Messrs. Robert Brown and Co. established
these works in 1876, and at them produce white enamelled earthenware
goods of a similar quality to those of Staffordshire. Their principal
productions are cabinet stands and lavatories of every requisite shape
both for domestic and shop fittings, plug basins, pans, and other
sanitary appliances, baths of every kind (a speciality being the
larger baths, five feet six inches in length, a size rarely attempted
in earthenware), washing tubs, sinks, &c., plumber’s fittings,
washhand-table tops, with and without toilet ware, plain and coloured
pavement and wall tiles, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Crown Works._--At the Crown Crucible Works, belonging to Messrs.
Robert Brown and Son, plumbago crucibles and kindred goods are
manufactured. The marks are a crown and name, BROWN PAISLEY, and a
crucible within an oval border surmounted by a crown.


                             GRANGEMOUTH.

_Fire-brick Works._--These works, belonging to the Grangemouth Coal
Company, were established in 1842. The clay, which is of good quality,
is got at a depth of about forty-eight fathoms, under lease from the
Earl of Zetland. The productions of the works consist of ornamental
vases, and tazzæ of various patterns; statuary, both single figures and
groups; fountains, vases and plinths; flower-stands and pots; chimney
shafts, some of which are highly decorated in relief; pedestals,
brackets, &c.; and salt-glazed pipes, grate backs, bricks, tiles,
&c. The company received honourable mention for their goods at the
Exhibition of 1851, and at the Hamburg Exhibition of 1866 had a medal
awarded to them for their vases and ornamental figures.


                               GREENOCK.

_The Clyde Pottery._--The “Clyde Pottery” works were built and
established by Messrs. James and Andrew Muir and others in 1815, and it
is still the property of the Muir family, the present proprietors being
the daughters of the late Andrew Muir. The business was first carried
on by the proprietors under the style of the “Clyde Pottery Company,”
with Mr. James Stevenson as manager. Mr. Stevenson was succeeded in the
management by Thomas Shirley, to whom the business was transferred,
and who altered the name of the firm to Thomas Shirley & Co. In 1857
the Messrs. Shirley were succeeded by the “Clyde Pottery Company
(Limited),” with James Brownlie as manager. This company acquired the
ground adjoining the pottery known as the “Blubber Yard” (from the fact
that formerly the blubber obtained at the whale-fishing was boiled
there), and this piece of ground gave ample scope for extending the
works. The “Clyde Pottery Company (Limited)” existed for five years,
and was then succeeded by the present firm, who carry on the business
under the old style--the “Clyde Pottery Company”--and who, in taking
over the lease, also acquired the ground adjoining already referred to,
and have extended the works so as to do double the business of any of
their predecessors. The firm consists of three members--John Donald,
Robert Gibson Brown, and John McLauchlan--the two last taking the
active management of the concern. The goods produced are the ordinary
qualities of cream-coloured, sponged, painted, printed, pearl-white,
enamelled, and gilt, suitable for the home trade, and various kinds of
ware also to suit particular foreign markets. The mark used upon goods
is “C. P. CO.” (Clyde Pottery Company). The markets supplied
are the Home, Scotch, and Irish; and considerable business is done
abroad with Calcutta, Mauritius, Rangoon, Java, Newfoundland, and
Canada.


                              DUMBARTON.

There were pot-works at Dumbarton in the latter part of last and the
beginning of the present century. About 1800, or thereabout, Anthony
Amatt, originally of Derby, and afterwards with Champion, of Bristol,
worked at Dumbarton. He afterwards returned to Bristol, and died there
in 1851, aged ninety-two.


                              RUTHERGLEN.

_Caledonian Pottery._--The “Caledonian Pottery” at Rutherglen, near
Glasgow, was established at Glasgow about 1780 by a joint stock
company, and from the company was acquired, about 1825, by the
grandfather and father of the present head of the firm of Murray and
Co., by whom the manufactory is carried on. In 1870 the works were
removed from Glasgow to Rutherglen, about a couple of miles from that
city. At first fine porcelain and china were made; then cream-coloured
printed ware, with Rockingham and salt-glazed wares. In 1851 the demand
sprang up for stoneware ale and other bottles, and this has become
one of the staple trades of Glasgow and the surrounding district. The
goods now produced are the usual classes of “Bristol” glazed stoneware,
salt-glazed stoneware, cane ware, and Rockingham and Egyptian black
wares. In these classes of goods all the usual domestic articles are
very extensively made, both for the home and continental markets. The
quality produced is much above the average in excellence, and the goods
of this firm are in much repute. A speciality of Messrs. Murray and
Co. is their patent “spongy iron filter” which has been officially
recommended by Royal Commission and has been awarded a medal. It is
one of the most perfect and useful of filters, and its principle of
construction is thoroughly good. The mark used by Murray and Co. is a
lion rampant.


                      PORTOBELLO, NEAR EDINBURGH.

_Midlothian Potteries._--The Midlothian Stoneware Potteries at
Portobello and Musselburgh, near Edinburgh, were established about
1857 by Mr. W. A. Gray, for the manufacture of general stoneware goods,
but they had, I am informed by him, been in existence as earthenware
works for upwards of a century before that time. They are now carried
on under the style of “W. A. Gray & Sons.” The goods produced are all
kinds of stoneware, and the more ordinary descriptions of earthenware.
In the first are all the usual descriptions of spirit jars and bottles,
spirit barrels, bowls and pans, jugs and pitchers, butter, beef, and
jam-pots, bottles, feet and carriage warmers, &c.; and in earthenware
many useful articles. They are principally supplied to the home market.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Portobello Pottery._--These old-established works at Portobello,
near Edinburgh, were established in 1770, and are now carried on by
Messrs. A. W. Buchan & Co. For a number of years they turned out
ordinary white earthenware and Rockingham ware, but since 1842 the
manufacture has been entirely confined to stoneware. In this ware
bottles of various kinds, jars, jugs, feet and carriage warmers,
spirit bottles, and all the usual classes of goods, are extensively
manufactured, principally for the home markets. The mark of the firm is
a star.


                              KIRKCALDY.

_Sinclairtown Pottery._--Messrs. George McLachlan & Son were
manufacturers of ordinary earthenware at this place; the works are now
closed.

Other manufactories are, the _Kirkcaldy Pottery_ belonging to
Messrs. David Methven & Son, and the _Gallatown Pottery_ belonging
to Messrs. Robert Heron & Sons.


                                BONESS.

_The Boness Pottery_, as it is now called, dates from 1766. It was
originally planned and partly constructed by a Mr. Roebuck, an
enterprising Englishman, largely engaged in the coal and iron trade
in this district, who for some time lived in Kenneil House, belonging
to the Duke of Hamilton. For some cause Mr. Roebuck left for England,
and the pottery came by purchase into the possession of a Mr. Cowen,
and afterwards, in 1799 of Mr. Alexander Cumming, who carried it on
successfully for a number of years; then his nephew James Cumming
carried on the business, and although it only consisted of three kilns
it became one of the largest potteries in Scotland, if not the very
largest. Earthenware and brown ware were manufactured in all their
branches. The firm had another manufactory, called the “South Pottery,”
where brown ware was made for the home markets. In the possession of
the present firm is a punch bowl manufactured in these works with the
following inscription painted upon it:

    “What art can with the potter’s art compare?
    For of what we are ourselves of such we make our ware.”

It was made in the time of Thos. Cowen, and bears the date 1794. They
have in their possession also other, but undated, specimens of the
productions of the early manufactory. At the death of James Cumming the
works passed into the hands of his nephew, William Cumming, and being
sold in 1836 were bought by James Jamieson, and carried on for a number
of years, under the firm of James Jamieson & Co., and afterwards by the
son of Mr. Jamieson under the same style; the proprietors being John
Marshall and James Jamieson. After Mr. Jamieson’s death that part of
the works belonging to him was, in 1854, bought by Mr. John Marshall
and carried on, on his own account, until 1867, when he was joined by
Mr. William McNay as a partner, under the style of John Marshall & Co.
These works were the first in Scotland to adopt Needham’s patent for
manufacturing clay. The productions are the ordinary useful classes
of earthenware goods in dinner, tea, toilet, and other services, and
all the usual domestic articles; these are produced in white, sponged,
printed, painted, enamelled and gilt styles, and are supplied both to
home and foreign markets.


                             PRESTONPANS.

_Prestonpans Pottery._--There were, until 1838, two old pot-works,
each more than a century old, in Prestonpans; in that year they
were both closed. In 1836 Messrs. Belfield & Co. established the
“Prestonpans Pottery,” which they still carry on; the goods produced
being Rockingham tea-pots, cane jugs, &c.


                                ALLOA.

_Alloa Pottery._--These works were established in 1790 by Mr. James
Anderson, and were afterwards carried on by Mr. William Gardner; in
1855 they passed by purchase into the hands of the present proprietors,
Messrs. W. & J. Bailey. At first the works, under Mr. Anderson,
produced common brownware pans and crocks, and by Mr. Gardner the
addition was made of Rockingham ware tea-pots. By the present firm
this branch of manufacture has been considerably improved, and so
greatly extended that at the time I write, I am informed, no less than
twenty-six thousand tea-pots can be produced by them per week. Majolica
and jet ware goods are also largely made and are of good quality,
and a speciality of the firm is its artistic engraving of ferns and
other decorations of the finer qualities of tea-pots, jugs, &c. The
productions of the Alloa Pottery, besides a home trade, are exported in
large quantities to Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Germany, France,
America, &c., and medals have been awarded to them at the Paris and
Philadelphia Exhibitions. The excellent quality of the Alloa goods
“arises from the nature of the clay got in the neighbourhood,” and
the density of colour and softness to touch of the glaze are highly
commendable.


                             THE HEBRIDES.

Hand-made pottery is still made, and used, in all its primitive
simplicity. The following letter, which I am permitted to print,
is so full of interesting matter concerning this curious phase of
fictile art, that I give it entire. It was addressed by W. Morrison,
Esq., M.P., to my friend, Mr. W. H. Goss, and dated from the House of
Commons. It runs as follows:

   “The circumstances under which I came upon the hand-made pottery
   were as follows. In conversation with a Scotch friend on
   archæological matters, he happened to mention that _hand-made
   pottery_ is still used in the Hebrides. Taken in connection
   with the fact that the inhabitants of some of the islands still,
   I believe, live in the same circular dry stone huts, with their
   cattle under the same roof, of which so many traces remain on
   Dartmoor, Ingleborough in Yorkshire, the Yr Eifel Hills in
   Carnarvonshire, and with the curious speculations contained in
   the introduction to the popular tales of the West Highlands,
   by Mr. Campbell, this fact seemed to be of some archæological
   interest. Mr. Tyler, in his ‘Early History of Mankind,’ gives
   many instances of the old savage instruments having lasted to
   our times, _e.g._, the flint knife used to cut cabbages by
   some old woman in Orkney, the bone ‘barker’ from Cornwall, in
   Christy and Blackmore Museums, the stone hammer for breaking the
   shells of whelks in Brittany, and so on.

   “My friend gave me an introduction to Mr. D. Munro, the
   chamberlain of Sir James Matherson, Bart., at Stornoway, in the
   Lewes, and Mr. Munro promptly sent me a complete tea-service
   consisting of teapot, milk-jug, sugar-basin, slop-basin, egg
   cups (or probably dram cups), cups and saucers, and marmalade
   pot! which he had purchased for the magnificent sum of 10s.
   from an old woman at Stornoway, who was actually using them
   in the year of grace 1868 at her tea table. The pottery is
   evidently hand-made, and is of a very rough quality and form,
   baked, but not turned on the wheel. I gave half the set to the
   Blackmore Museum at Salisbury, and half to the Christy Museum,
   at 103, Victoria Street (visible on Fridays between 10 and
   4 p.m. by ticket obtained at the British Museum; no doubt a
   letter enclosing stamped envelope would save the trouble of an
   application to the British Museum). The pottery is in a case in
   the secretary’s room. I am not sure if this room is shown to the
   public, but of course it would be shown to any one having an
   object in view.

   “The remarkable thing is, that the pottery is distinctly copied,
   rudely enough, from modern pottery. The forms are ordinary
   Tottenham Court Road forms, and their continued use in an island
   with a regular steamboat service from Glasgow strikes me as very
   curious.

   “Of course the view of the pottery is open to you, and all the
   information contained in this letter. I should prefer, however,
   not having my name published, unless to substantiate any
   statements I have made.”

Manufactories of brown ware, of delft, of common earthenware, and
fire-clay goods, have also existed, or exist, in other parts of
Scotland.




                             CHAPTER XIV.


The following list, now for the first time printed, will be found
to contain all the specifications, relating in any way to pottery,
enrolled from the year 1626 down to 1877. The first portion of the
list, down to 1862, I have compiled from the “Abridgments of the
Specifications,” prepared by Mr. B. Woodcroft; and for the latter
portion I am indebted to Mr. William Spence, As. Inst. C.E., the
well-known Patent agent, by whom it has been specially prepared for me,
and to whom I tender my acknowledgments.


                A LIST OF PATENTS RELATING TO CERAMICS

                          FROM 1626 TO 1877.

     DATE.        TO WHOM GRANTED.                   OBJECT.
 1626 Oct. 26   Rous and Cullyn             Stone potts, juggs, and
                                              bottells.
 1635 Feb. 17   Ramsey, Arnold, and         Improvements in fuel for
                  Ayliffe                     drying, &c., of pottery,
                                              tiles, &c.
 1671 April 23  Dwight, John                Porcelain or china.
 1676 Oct. 27   Van Hamme, J. A.            Tiles, porcelain and
                                              earthenwares.
 1684 June 12   Dwight, John                “White gorges, marbled
                                              porcelaine vessels,
                                              statues and figures,” &c.
 1722 June 13   Holt and London             Composition or mixture for
                                              making white ware.
   „  Oct. 17   Billin, Thomas              “Refined earthenware” from
                                              native materials.
 1724 Jan. 28   Redrich and Jones           Staining, clouding,
                                              damasking, &c.
 1726 Nov. 5    Benson, Thomas              Grinding, &c., of flint.
 1729 May 9     Bell, Samuel                Red marble stoneware.
 1732 Jan. 14   Benson, Thomas              Grinding, &c., of flint.
 1733 April 24  Shawe, Ralph                Chocolate and white ware.
 1744 Dec. 6    Heylyn and Frye             China.
 1749 Nov. 17   Frye, Thomas                  „
 1762 Jan. 25   White, William              Crucibles, &c.
 1764 Dec. 5    Williamson and Spackman     China.
 1766 June 10   Lauraguais, Count de          „
 1768 March 17  Cookworthy, William           „
 1769 Nov. 16   Wedgwood, Josiah            Encaustic painting.
 1775 Sept. 15  Cookworthy and Champion     China.
 1781 March 28  Parker, William             Pedestals, candlesticks,
                                              busts, figures, &c.
 1782 Aug. 1    Crease, James               Construction of stool-pans.
 1783 May 31    Cartledge, J.               Glazing.
 1784 Feb. 5        „      „                   „
 1785 May 3     De la Mayne, Thomas         Buttons of burnt earth or
                                              porcelain.
 1786 Aug. 5    Skidmore, John              Decoration.
 1789 Dec. 8    Baynes, John                Improvement in ladles, &c.
 1790 Oct. 16   Hempel, Johanna             Composition for wares.
 1796 June 20   Keeling, James              Glazing, &c.
   „  July 5    Close and Keeling           Kilns, &c.
   „  Oct. 3    Wedgwood, Ralph             Improvements in
                                              manufacture.
   „  Oct. 3        „       „               Composition.
   „  Oct. 3        „       „               Potters’ ovens, &c.
   „  Oct. 3    Pepper, John                  „       „
 1799 Feb. 28   Hickling, S. S.             Chemical and other vessels.
 1800 Jan. 9    Turner, W. and J.           China and earthenware.
   „  Jan. 20   Sanford, Isaac              Bricks, tiles, pottery, &c.
 1806 Nov. 6    Vazie, Robert               Machinery, &c.
 1807 Feb. 7    Spershott, James            Improvements in body.
 1809 July 26   Murphy, J. C.               Mosaics, &c.
   „  Sept. 29  White, John, jun.           Artificial stone figures,
                                              &c.
 1810 May 22    Docksey, William            Preparation of glazing
                                              materials, &c.
 1811 June 14   Waters, Richard             Improvements in manufacture.
   „  Aug. 7    Gilbert, Thomas                „         „     „
 1812 Dec. 16   Hamilton, Joseph               „         „     „
 1813 April 28     „        „                  „         „     „
   „  July 23   Mason, C. J.                “Improvements in manufacture
                                              of English porcelain.”
   „  July 31   Hamilton, Joseph            New application of earths,
                                              &c.
 1817 Dec. 5    Busk and Harvey             Pipes and tubes, &c.
 1818 April 16  Clayton, Robert             Decoration.
   „  Nov. 10   Poole, Moses                Statues, &c.
   „  July 26   Bagshawe, Samuel            Vases, &c.
 1820 June 2    Hague, John                 Improvements in materials.
 1823 Nov. 22   Bourne, Joseph              Kilns and ovens.
 1825 June 21   Brookes, Philip             Moulds, &c.
   „  Nov. 1    Ridgway, J. and W.          Cock, tap, or valve.
 1828 March 13  Jones, R. G.                Lithographic decoration of
                                              china, &c.
 1830 Jan. 26   Wright, Samuel              Tiles, &c.
 1831 May 18    Cooper, R. B.               Cock, tap, or valve.
   „  Sept. 7   Potts, Oliver, and Potts    Printing on earthenware.
 1833 May 11    Spinney, Thomas             Crucibles, fire-bricks, &c.
   „  Dec. 11   Wisker, John                Improvements in machinery.
 1835 April 14  Embrey, G.                  Decoration.
   „  Dec. 3    Potts, W. W.                Surface printing on pottery.
 1836 May 12    Wilson, Richard             Improvements in machinery.
 1837 July 10   Chubb, William              Commode pans, &c.
   „  Sept. 14  Davies and Wilson           Improvements in machinery.
 1838 March 14  Dale, William               Columns, bedposts, &c., of
                                              earthenware.
 1839 April 23  Singer and Pether           Tiles, &c.
   „  May 25    Clarke, T. and C.           Glazing.
   „  June 4    Nickels and Greenwood       Decoration.
   „  June 22   Turner and Minton           Improved porcelain.
   „  June 26   Ducôté, P. A.               Printing on pottery.
   „  July 3    Yates, James                Raised ornaments, &c.
   „  Nov. 2    Cutten, John                Garden pots.
   „  Nov. 12   White, James                Improvements in machinery.
   „  Nov. 21   Ducôté, P.A.                Printing on pottery.
   „  Dec. 4    Trewhitt, H.                Improvement in manufacture.
   „  Dec. 16   Wood, John                  Decoration.
 1840 Jan. 11   Ridgway, John               Moulds.
   „  Jan. 11   Ridgway and Wall            Improvements in manufacture.
   „  Jan. 11      „        „               Preparing bats.
   „  Feb. 2    Kerr, Thomas                Improvements in body.
   „  June 17   Prosser, Richard            Buttons, &c.
 1841 April 29  Gibbs, Joseph               Materials.
   „  June 12   Palmer, Edward              Printing on pottery.
   „  Aug. 21   Harvig and Moreau           Decoration
   „  Nov. 20   Venables and Tunnicliffe    Kilns, ovens, &c.
 1842 April 30  Barclay, Henry              Decoration
   „  July 23   Ayers, C. R.                    „
 1842 Nov. 15   Brown, Robert               Garden pots, &c.
 1843 Jan. 14   Fontainemoreau, P. A.       Improvements in body.
   „  June 3    Brown, William              Improvements in manufacture.
   „  June 15   Booth, G. R.                Firing kilns, ovens, &c.
   „  Oct. 5    Boote, Richard              Decoration.
   „  Oct. 5    Wall, George, jun.          Improvements in manufacture.
   „  Oct. 18   Graham, James                   „       „       „
   „  Dec. 28   Thorneycroft, G. B.             „       „       „
 1844 Jan. 20   Basford, William                „       „       „
   „  Jan. 23   Wright, Samuel                  „       „       „
   „  Nov. 2    Smith, Charles              Enamelling, &c.
   „  Dec. 30   Betts and Stocker           Bottles, jars, &c.
 1845 May 22    Hullmandel, C. J.           Decoration.
   „  May 24    Simpson and Seddon          Kilns, flues, &c.
   „  Nov. 6    Cooper, R. B.               Taps, cocks, stoppers, &c.
   „  Nov. 20   Skinner and Whalley         Improvements in manufacture.
   „  Dec. 4    Leslie, John                Gas fittings, &c.
   „  Dec. 15   Findler, Thomas             Flint grinding, &c.
 1846 Feb. 25   Maddock, John               Kilns, ovens, &c.
   „  March 25  Smith, Charles              Improvements in manufacture.
   „  May 22    Lutwyche, C. F.             Buttons, &c.
   „  May 28    Stocker, A. S.              Bottles, &c.
   „  July 23   Fourdrinier, G. H.          Printing on pottery, &c.
   „  July 30   Mallet and Dawson           Uses for porcelain, &c.
   „  Nov. 17   Masters, Thomas                „          „
   „  Dec. 14   Ford, Charles               Improvements in manufacture.
 1847 July 29   Newton, A. V.               Kilns, ovens, &c.
   „  Aug. 4    Bourne, Joseph                 „          „
   „  Oct. 21   Ridgway, John               Boxes, &c.
   „  Nov. 20   Walker, Thomas              Decoration.
   „  Dec. 31   Pratt, F. E.                Improvements in manufacture.
 1848 March 8   Whishaw, F.                     „       „        „
   „  March 14  Collins and Reynolds        Decoration.
   „  April 10  Spencer, Thomas             Improvements in manufacture.
 1849 Feb. 8    Tooth, William                  „       „       „
   „  May 3     Buller, T. W.                   „       „       „
   „  May 22    Da Costa, S. I.                 „       „       „
   „  May 24    Goodfellow, T. and G.           „       „       „
   „  June 7    Masters, Thomas                 „       „       „
   „  Sept. 20  Edwards, D. O.              Stoves, kilns, &c.
   „  Sept. 20  Lorkin, Josiah              Improvements in machinery,
                                              &c.
   „  Sept. 27  Browne and Veale            Grinding flint, &c.
   „  Dec. 15   Harcourt, Robert            Knobs, handles, &c.
 1850 June 4    D’Angely, Paul              Improvements in manufacture.
   „  Oct. 17   Baddeley, J. H.                  „       „       „
 1851 Feb. 2    Févre, G. D.                     „       „       „
   „  March 17  Minton and Hoffstaedt       Faces for dials, clocks, &c.
   „  April 26  Nasmyth and Minton          Tiles, &c.
   „  May 10    Harding, H.                 Gas burners, &c.
   „  Oct. 2    Hodge, William              Improvements in manufacture.
   „  Oct. 29   Biddell and Green                „       „       „
   „  Nov. 4    Beswick, Robert                  „       „       „
   „  Dec. 8    Pidding, William                 „       „       „
 1852 March 24     „        „                    „       „       „
   „  April 15  Beltzung, F. J.             Bottles, jugs, &c.
   „  April 20  Ridgway, John               Decoration.
   „  June 12   Reid and Brett              Electric telegraph
                                              insulators, &c.
   „  July 13   Palm, J. B.                 Tiles, bricks, &c.
   „  Oct. 11   Moorhouse, H.               Improvements in machinery.
   „  Oct. 12   Smith, W. H.                Lava ware.
   „  Oct. 19   Harcourt, J. and W.         Knobs, handles, &c.
   „  Oct. 19   Allman, F. H.               Brush backs, &c.
   „  Oct. 26   Rowley, Charles             Nail heads, &c.
   „  Oct. 30   Bale and Sanders            Improvements in machinery.
   „  Nov. 6    Gosnell, J. E. and C.       Brush backs, &c.
   „  Nov. 17   Way and Paine               Improvements in manufacture.
   „  Dec. 16   Healey, John                Application of porcelain,
                                              &c.
   „  Dec. 22   Roberts, John                    „      „      „
 1853 Jan. 1    Brough, Joseph              Opaline, &c.
   „  Jan. 25   Remonde, A. F.              Decoration.
   „  Jan. 26   Ador, N. F.                 Improvements in manufacture.
   „  Jan. 31   Lightfoot, Thomas           Glazes, &c.
   „  Jan. 31   Pinkerton, John             Decoration, &c.
   „  Feb. 10   Breese, C.                       „
   „  March 29  Pym, John                   Earthenware sleepers, &c.
   „  April 4   Steigewald, F.              Improvements in manufacture.
   „  April 6   Johnson, William            Decoration.
   „  April 11  Campbell, William M.        Kilns, &c.
   „  April 25  Bernard, J.                 Improvements in manufacture.
   „  April 26  Poole, Moses                     „       „       „
   „  May 16    Richardson, Thomas               „       „       „
   „  July 14   Needham and Kite                 „       in machinery,
                                              &c.
   „  July 14   Brown, Hon. Sir Richard     Coffins, catacombs,
                                              sarcophagi, cenotaphs,
                                              &c.
   „  July 15   D’Huart, H. J.              Improvements in manufacture.
   „  July 25   Ferguson, J.                Kilns, ovens, &c.
   „  Aug. 12   Wareham, H.                 Decoration.
   „  Aug. 17   Grimsley, Thomas            Bricks, tiles, &c.
   „  Aug. 18   Cornelius, William          Decoration.
   „  Aug. 18   Bergevin, A. M. M. de       Improvements in manufacture.
   „  Sept. 14  Nash, William                    „       „       „
   „  Sept. 16  Thomson and Lockerbie       Kilns, ovens, &c.
   „  Oct. 7    Ellis, William              Decoration.
   „  Oct. 11   Campbell, W. M.             Kilns, ovens, &c.
   „  Oct. 13      „        „                  „     „
   „  Nov. 1    Bale and Lucas              Decoration.
   „  Nov. 4    Pratt, Henry                Improvements in manufacture.
   „  Nov. 19   Daniell, Henry                   „       „       „
   „  Dec. 27   Prideaux, T. S.             Kilns, ovens, &c.
 1854 Jan. 18   Sharp, Edmond               Improvements in machinery.
   „  Jan. 19   Webb, Thomas                Kilns, &c.
   „  Jan. 21   Venables, T. B.             Improvements in manufacture.
   „  Feb. 18   Britten, B.                       „       „ machinery.
   „  May 11    Doulton, Henry              Kilns, ovens, &c.
   „  May 24    Jennings and Davenport         „     „
   „  June 15   Kite, James                 Improvements in machinery.
   „  June 22   Blashfield, J. M.                 „       „ manufacture.
   „  July 5    Venables and Mann           Decoration.
   „  July 15   Brindley, E. H.                  „
   „  Aug. 26   Wall, George                Improvements in manufacture.
   „  Aug. 29   Seithen, John                    „       „       „
   „  Sept. 4   Mayer and Bush              Grinding flint, &c.
   „  Oct. 25   Rickhuss and Toft           Parian, porcelain, &c.
 1855 Jan. 3    Venables and Mann           Decoration.
   „  Jan. 3        „         „             Figures and Ornaments.
   „  Jan. 13   Hollins, M. D.              Slip-kilns, &c.
   „  Jan. 27   Mayer and Bush              Grinding flint, &c.
   „  April 3   Evrard, M.                  Improvements in manufacture.
   „  May 11    Pascall and Fry             Garden pots.
   „  May 28    Grafton, Henry              Heating, &c.
   „  June 12   Hackney, Nathan             Improvements in manufacture.
   „  June 20   Gernon, James                    „       „       „
   „  June 23   Silbermann, I. J.                „       „       „
   „  June 27   Margueritte, L. J. F.            „       „       „
   „  July 2    Tooth, W. H.                     „       „       „
   „  July 6    Bellay, J. A.                    „       „       „
   „  July 13   Cochran, Robert                  „       „       „
   „  July 31   Dalman, G. J.                    „       „       „
   „  Sept. 4   Gilbee, W. A.                    „       „       „
   „  Oct. 1    Illingworth, W.             Printing on pottery.
   „  Oct. 4    Sanders, F. G. and T.
                  R., jun.                  Improvements in manufacture.
   „  Oct. 23   Richardson, Thomas               „       „       „
   „  Nov. 28   Barbier, C. J. B.           Kilns, &c.
 1856 Jan. 7    Jarvis and Clare               „
   „  Jan. 26   Gardner, E. V.              Heating, &c.
   „  Feb. 12   Jablonowski, J. F. P.       Chromo-lithographic
                                              decoration.
   „  Feb. 20   Barsham, John               Improvements in manufacture.
   „  March 4   Rosenberg, C. T.            Decoration.
   „  March 6   Pochin, H. D.               Improvements in manufacture.
   „  March 10  Hannah, Robert              Kilns, &c.
   „  March 10  Chablin and Hennique        Decoration.
   „  March 25  Bromley and Adams           Kilns, ovens, &c.
   „  March 25  Illingworth, Wm.            Decoration.
   „  March 26  Tolhausen, A.               Improvements in manufacture.
   „  March 31  Looker, B., jun.            Burial indicators.
   „  May 9     Léon and Blamond            Decoration.
   „  May 24    Illingworth, William             „
   „  May 31    Needham and Kite            Improvements in machinery.
   „  June 27   Johnson, J. H.              Carbonate of barytes, &c.
   „  June 28   McAdam, William                   „        „
                                              manufacture.
   „  June 28   Bellford, A. E. L.          Ovens, kilns, &c.
   „  July 2    Nourisson, Alfred           Kilns, ovens, &c.
   „  July 2    Spittle, W. F.              Improvements in machinery.
   „  July 7    Chenot, A. L. S. and
                  E. C. A.                  Improvements in machinery.
   „  July 12   Petrie, Wm.                 Porous goods.
   „  July 21   Leak, Elias                 Improvements in manufacture.
   „  Aug. 4    Gottgetreu, C. G.           Lithographic printing on
                                              pottery.
   „  Aug. 8    Davenport, Robert           Kilns, &c.
   „  Aug. 13   Lesser, David               Improvements in machinery.
   „  Aug. 28   Gardissal, C. D.            Fuel.
   „  Nov. 3    Tearne and Richmond         Decoration.
   „  Nov. 3    Kirkham, John               Kilns, ovens, &c.
   „  Dec. 4    Bellford, A. E. L.          Bricks, tiles, &c.
   „  Dec. 4    Margueritte, L. J. F.       Retorts, crucibles, &c.
   „  Dec. 30   Brooman, R. A.              Improvements in manufacture.
 1857 Jan. 21   Neville, Samuel                  „        „ machinery.
   „  Jan. 21      „       „                     „        „     „
   „  Jan. 24   Green, Daniel               Kilns, &c.
   „  Feb. 7    Skertchley, Joseph          Saggers, &c.
   „  Feb. 23   Kirkham, John               Kilns, ovens, &c.
   „  March 21  Blackburn, B.               Porcelain, &c., pans.
   „  March 28  Girard, H. B.               Telegraph insulators, &c.
   „  April 9   Harland, John               Purifying clay.
   „  April 25  Tonks and Breeden           Gas burners, &c.
   „  May 6     Bousfield, G. T.            Improvements in machinery.
   „  May 7     Dolléans, L. C.             Decoration.
   „  May 11    Siemens, C. W.              Heating, &c.
   „  June 1    Tingle, George              Improvements in manufacture.
   „  June 4    Boote, T. L. and R.         Mosaic and other pottery.
   „  June 6    Dopter, A. J. V.            Decoration.
   „  June 24   Bourry, E. A.               Improvements in manufacture.
   „  June 25      „      „                 Kilns, ovens, &c.
   „  July 1    Newton, W. E.               Decoration.
   „  July 8    Brianchon, J. J. H.              „
   „  July 23   Bouvert and Pascal          Improvements in machinery.
   „  Oct. 15   Negretti and Zambra         Decoration, lettering, &c.
   „  Oct. 28   Greening, William           Decoration.
   „  Oct. 30   Prideaux, T. S.             Heating, &c.
   „  Dec. 9    Westendarp, C., jun.        Artificial ivory.
   „  Dec. 24   Burleigh and Danchell       Improvements in machinery.
   „  Dec. 29   Mourot, Victor              Kilns, ovens, &c.
   „  Dec. 30   Harmer, Richd.              Cigarette mouthpieces.
 1858 Jan. 22   Basford, William            Kilns, ovens, &c.
   „  Jan. 28   Spence, William             Chimney-pots.
   „  Feb. 11   Looker, B., jun.            Telegraph insulators, &c.
   „  April 26  Lee, E. E.                  Buttons, &c.
   „  May 31    Girerd and Wohlgemuth       Decoration.
   „  June 7    Vigers, Edward              Bricks and tiles.
   „  July 12   Northen, William            Application of stoneware.
   „  July 20   Doley, Bigland, and
                  Worrall                   Decoration.
   „  July 22   Blake, Benjamin             Kilns, &c.
   „  Sept. 18  Luis, Jozé                  Machinery.
   „  Sept. 27  Lander, William             Decoration.
   „  Oct. 2    Monier, H.                  Gas-burners, &c.
   „  Nov. 6    Cliff, John                 Kilns, &c.
 1859 Jan. 3    Furnival, Derbyshire,
                  and Emery                 Improvements in manufacture.
   „  Feb. 11   Cogan, Robert                    „       „  machinery.
   „  Feb. 14   Parkinson, James            Earthenware coffins.
   „  Feb. 19   Basford, William            Bricks and tiles.
   „  Feb. 23   Russell, Samuel             Handles, &c.
   „  March 1   Edwards, John               Improvements in manufacture.
   „  March 21  Leoni, S.                        „       „       „
   „  April 7   Garrett, John               Goblets, jugs, &c.
   „  May 26    Dorn, Charles               Kilns, ovens, &c.
   „  June 23   Doulton, Henry              Earthenware jars and bottles.
   „  June 25   Roberts, John               Filters.
   „  July 30   Seithen, A. B.              Cases, covers, &c.
   „  Aug. 3    Dowling, Edward             Rosettes, &c.
   „  Oct. 6    Hind and Lowenthal          Improvements in manufacture.
   „  Oct. 17   Berry, George                    „       „       „
   „  Nov. 2    Hess, R. H.                 China gas-burners, &c.
   „  Nov. 28   Bower, Joseph               Crucibles, &c.
   „  Dec. 9    Spiller, Joel               Drying, &c.
 1860 Jan. 17   Brooman, J. A.              Cements, &c.
   „  Jan. 20   Ferté, F. J. J. de la       Photographic decorations.
   „  Jan. 24   Gatellier, E. L.            Crucibles, &c.
   „  Jan. 30   Holmes and Cordon           Improvements in manufacture.
   „  Feb. 6    Skertchley, Joseph               „       „       „
   „  Feb. 18   Bewley, R., jun.            Heating.
   „  March 1   Blashfield, J. M.           Kilns, &c.
   „  March 7   Chapuis, C. A.              Decorating, &c.
   „  March 23  Meyer, F. C.                Copying ornamental figures
                                              and forms.
   „  April 27  Northen, William            Kilns, &c.
   „  June 5    Jardin and Girard           Bricks, tiles, &c.
   „  June 23   Jobson, Robert              Moulding.
   „  July 19   Shaw, I. B. and J. E.       Decoration.
   „  Aug. 30   Lockett and Goodwin         Kilns, &c.
   „  Sept. 15  Barnwell and Rollason       Improvements in body.
   „  Sept. 20  Richardson and Prentice          „       „    „
   „  Sept. 20  Morley, J. R.               Baking dishes.
   „  Sept. 25  Geoghegan, Robert           Improvements in machinery.
   „  Sept. 26  Boulton, William            Stoves, &c.
   „  Nov. 19   Jowett, H. A.               Fixing ovens, &c.
   „  Nov. 22   Jobson, Robert              Moulding.
   „  Nov. 23   Venables, John              Decorating.
   „  Nov. 26   McKenzie and Hamilton       Bobbins, &c.
   „  Dec. 4    Lepetit, Maxime             Improvements in manufacture.
   „  Dec. 4    Walter and Henry            Decoration.
   „  Dec. 27   Parry, William              Chimney-pots, pedestals, &c.
   „  Dec. 29   Chamberlain, H.             Improvements in manufacture.
 1861 Jan. 22   Siemens, C. W. and F.       Furnaces, &c.
   „  Jan. 28   Newton, W. E.               Dinner plates.
   „  Feb. 23   Spencer, Thomas             Improvements in manufacture.
   „  April 1   Brooman, R. A.              Decoration.
   „  April 3   Blanchard, M. H.            Terra-cotta, stoneware, &c.
   „  April 20  Clark, William              Decoration.
   „  May 15    Doulton, Henry              Chemical vessels, &c.
   „  May 18    Poulton, A. C.              Improvements in body.
   „  June 20   Lesneur, A. N.              Panels, &c.
   „  June 25   Lafon, Jules                Chromo-lithographic
                                              decoration.
   „  July 8    Cobley, Thomas              Improvements in manufacture.
   „  July 15      „      „                      „       „       „
   „  Aug. 1    Pratt, Matthew              Candle moulds.
   „  Aug. 3    Lewis, Joseph               Printing on pottery.
   „  Aug. 13   Jacob, Joseph               Decoration.
   „  Aug. 15   Kain, F. A.                 Artificial stone
                                              earthenware.
   „  Nov. 12   Newton, A. V.               Dinner plates.
   „  Dec. 11   Brooman, R. A.              Decoration.
 1862 Jan. 11   Wilkinson, William          Ornamentation.
   „  Jan. 27   Robotham and Hackney        Purifying slip, glaze, &c.
   „  Feb. 12   Joseph, J. S.               Improvements in coke ovens,
                                              &c.
   „  Feb. 13   Joseph, J. S.               Improved retort oven.
   „  Feb. 21   MacAdam and Chrystal        Earthenware for sheaves,
                                              pulleys, &c.
   „  Feb. 26   Cliff, John                 Improvements in glazing
                                              stoneware, &c.
   „  Feb. 28   Mackenzie, Murray and
                  Hamilton                  Improvements in machinery.
   „  March 19  Brooman, R. A.              Printing and painting upon
                                              glass, &c.
   „  March 22  Henry, Michael              Kilns, ovens, and furnaces.
   „  March 27  Birkbeck, G. H.             Imitation mosaics.
   „  April 26  Le Souëf, D. C.             Improvements in nails, &c.
   „  May 7     Markland, Thomas            Wearing apparel appliances.
   „  May 15    Birkbeck, G. H.             Apparatus for consuming
                                              smoke.
   „  June 17   Clark, William              Buttons.
   „  June 21   Yapp, G. W.                 Chromo-lithographic printing.
   „  June 27   Brooman, R. A.                      „              „
   „  June 30   Murray, W. F.               Stoneware bottles, &c.
   „  Aug. 18   Cimeg, J.                   Depositing metals on.
   „  Aug. 18   Boetius, H.                 Fireproof materials.
   „  Sept. 4   Platt and Richardson        Burning bricks, &c.
   „  Sept. 19  Maw, G.                     Mosaic inlays.
   „  Sept. 29  Ellis, H.                   Compound silicates.
   „  Sept. 30  Hughes, J. L.               Ornamental patterns.
   „  Oct. 3    Robotham and Oswald         Purifying glaze, slip, &c.
   „  Oct. 16   Nelson, E.                  Heating apparatus.
   „  Oct. 27   Lindemann, G.               Bricks, tiles, &c.
   „  Nov. 25   Ranson, G.                  Sifting clay.
   „  Nov. 28   Buller and Mugford          Spur-supporting rings.
   „  Dec. 5    Tildesley and Sharpe        Knobs and spindles.
   „  Dec. 6    Craig, J. and M.            Manufacturing clay.
 1863 Feb. 7    Miller and Struthers        Securing bottle stoppers.
   „  Feb. 21   Malpas, C.                  Ovens or kilns.
   „  Feb. 23   Brooman, R. A.              Ornamenting, &c.
   „  Feb. 24   Hawthorn, J.                Handles for doors, &c.
   „  Feb. 26   Clark, W.                   Buttons.
   „  March 26  Johnson, J. H.              Boiler furnaces.
   „  April 7   Macintyre, J.               Knobs, &c.
   „  April 22  Durand, F.                  Moulding.
   „  May 11    Parkinson, J.               Monumental tablets.
   „  May 12    Warren, T.                  Furnaces or kilns.
   „  June 15   Forrester, J.               Bricks, &c.
   „  June 24   Hughes, J. L.               Ornamenting porcelain.
   „  June 30   Johnson, J. H.              Moulding.
   „  July 2    Brooman, R. A.              Coating slate, &c.
   „  July 27   Ford, F. and L.             Enamelling, &c.
   „  Aug. 31   Kramer, H. E.               Ornamenting.
   „  Oct. 3    Wilson, E. B.               Porcelain and glass.
   „  Oct. 7    Leak, E.                    Supporting ware in ovens.
   „  Nov. 6    Campbell, C. M.             Drying plates, &c.
   „  Dec. 11   Cliff, J.                   Transmitting power.
 1864 Jan. 11   Woolf, S.                   Packing.
   „  Feb. 1    Prince, A.                  Artificial pavement.
   „  Feb. 4    Edwards, J.                 Supporting in ovens.
   „  Feb. 19   Scrivener, R.               Preparing and drying.
   „  March 8   Newton, A. V.               Preparing clay.
   „  April 23  Worssam, G. J.              Expressing liquids.
   „  May 11    Gisborne, T. M.             Kilns.
   „  May 18    Boulenger, H. A. C.         Moulding.
   „  June 23   Cochran, R.                 Treating clay.
   „  June 24   Chamberlain, Craven and
                  Wedekind                  Kilns.
   „  Aug. 2    Johnson, J. H.              Glazes.
   „  Aug. 9    Clark, W.                   Ornamenting.
   „  Aug. 10   Johnson, J. H.              Gilding.
   „  Sept. 23  Woodbury, W. B.             Photography.
   „  Oct. 13   Clauss, L.                  Ornamenting.
   „  Nov. 10   Boote, T. L. and R.         Manufacture of pottery.
   „  Dec. 6    Martius, C. A.              Photography.
   „  Dec. 16   Brown, G.                   Cylinders.
   „  Dec. 29   Baugh, B.                   Enamelled wares.
 1865 Jan. 28   Burg, Victor                Filtering apparatus.
   „  Feb. 1    Meakin, J.                  Placing in ovens.
   „  Feb. 15   Emery, F. J.                Ornamenting.
   „  March 22  Wright, J.                  Preparing china clay.
   „  April 21  Scarratt and Dean           Impressions from grain of
                                              wood.
   „  April 22  Grainger and Girdler        Designs on porcelain, &c.
   „  April 26  Smith, W. H.                Photographing.
   „  April 27  Grainger and Girdler              „
   „  May 23    Hett, A.                    Preparing and ornamenting.
   „  June 10   Broomam, R. A.              Kilns.
   „  June 16   Gedge, W. E.                Manufacture of pottery.
   „  Aug. 11   Armstrong, R. W.            Moulding.
   „  Nov. 9    Newton, W. E.               Preparing surfaces.
   „  Nov. 24   Turner, G. W.               Manufacture of pottery.
   „  Nov. 27   Lake, W. R.                 Enamel.
   „  Dec. 8    Boulton and Worthington     Mortars, bowls, &c.
 1866 Jan. 15   Holdcroft, W. and Wood, J.  Instruments for potters’
                                              use.
   „  Jan. 31   Greaves, G.                 Glazed surfaces.
   „  Feb. 3    Jobson, R.                  Moulding.
   „  Feb. 6    Worthington, J.             Manufacture of dishes, &c.,
                                              &c.
   „  Feb. 9    Revan and Fleming           Furnaces and kilns.
   „  Feb. 9    Armstrong, R. W.            Manufacture of earthenware,
                                              &c.
   „  Feb. 14   Henry, Michael              Photography.
   „  Feb. 22   Leak, E.                    Improvements in tools used
                                              by potters.
   „  March 17  Ashton, R. H.               Ornamentation.
   „  May 12    Price, A. P.                Combustion of fuel.
   „  May 19    Brown, J. B.                Mowing machines.
   „  June 26   Cotterill, Ch. F.           Earthenware pipes.
   „  July 2    Bonneville, H. A.           Furnaces and kilns.
   „  July 7    Huntsmann, R.               Burning and drying bricks.
   „  Aug. 29   Davis, J.                   Improved method of treating
                                              limestone, &c.
   „  Sept. 20  Walker, A. B.               Improvements in brewing, &c.
   „  Nov. 27   Atterbury, J. H. and
                  Woolf, S.                 Manufacture of earthenware.
 1867 Jan. 9    Doulton, Henry              Pottery kilns.
   „  Feb. 2    Robinson, J. G.             Construction and arrangement
                                              of kilns and ovens.
   „  March 7   Newton, W. E.               Manufacture of porcelain.
   „  March 8   Hawthorn, Stephen           China and earthenware knobs.
  „   March 30  Higginson, G.               Producing opaline pictures
                                              into china, &c.
  „   April 1   Brooman, C. E.              Producing surfaces for
                                              printing, &c.
  „   April 23  Leigh, Elisha               Bowls, jugs, &c.
  „   April 26  Abel, C. D.                 Pulverizing substances.
  „   May 20    Tongue, J. G.               Pottery ovens (furnaces
                                              for).
  „   May 22    Cartland, J., and Bold, H.  Ornamenting bowls.
  „   May 23    Green, T. G.                Manufacture articles of
                                              earthenware.
  „   May 30    Orr, William                Drying potter’s clay.
  „   June 10   Orr, William                Potter’s clay.
  „   July 3    Borlase, Thomas             China clay.
  „   July 13   Fletcher, Henry             For mixing clay.
  „   Oct. 23   Abel, C. D.                 Pulverisation of substances.
  „   Oct. 24   Adcock, Henry               Kilns.
  „   Oct. 30   Piercy, F.                  Tinting or colouring.
  „   Nov. 2    Hicks, J. J.                Manufacture of earthenware
                                              handles for brushes.
  „   Nov. 13   Bland, P. E.                Baking potter’s ware.
  „   Nov. 23   Boulton, William            Transmission of motive power
                                              to potter’s wheels, &c.
  „   Nov. 28   Pratt, J. R.                Earthenware articles.
  „   Dec. 5    Leigh, T. J.                Improvements in furnaces.
  „   Dec. 13   Lintzenich, E. R.           Substitute for earthenware.
  „   Dec. 16   Kerr, William H.            Preparation of material used
                                              in manufacture of
                                              porcelain and pottery.
 1868 Jan. 15   Nimms, G.                   Composition furnace linings.
  „   Jan. 16   Postill, F.                 Kilns or ovens.
  „   Jan. 18   Newton, W. E.               Kilns or ovens.
  „   Jan. 25   Johnson, J. H.              Kilns for earthenware.
  „   Jan. 27   Hicks, J. J.                Earthenware handles and
                                              backs for mirrors.
  „   Jan. 27   Rendie, W. E.               Earthenware structures for
                                              protecting fruit trees.
  „   Feb. 26   Walker, E. R.               Transmitting motive power
                                              to potter’s machinery.
  „   March 26  Cliff, W. D.                Furnaces or kilns.
  „   April 7   Siemens, C. W.              Furnaces for kilns.
  „   May 27    Vidie, James                Ornamentation of
                                              earthenware.
  „   June 6    Maw, George                 Earthenware plant labels.
  „   June 11   Newton, W. E.               Cement.
  „   June 11   Thenard, A. E. G.           Combustion of fuel in
                                              pottery furnaces.
  „   June 12   Fleury, A. L.               Improvements in treating
                                              quartz for porcelain
                                              manufacture.
  „   June 17   Clark, A. M.                Purification of ceramics,
                                              &c.
  „   June 27   Hodge, P. R.                Smelting porcelain, &c.
  „   June 30   Green, Thomas G.            Composition to be used in
                                              earthenware.
  „   July 20   Newton, A. V.               Making pottery ware.
  „   Aug. 11   Moore, H., Moore, T.,
                  Moore, G.                 China tablets.
  „   Aug. 15   Leak, A. J., Leak, E.       Machinery for pottery.
  „   Aug. 15   Scott, H. Y. D.             Pottery kilns.
  „   Aug. 19   Atterbury, J. H.            Earthenware manufacture.
  „   Aug. 20   Ensell, H. C.               Earthenware kilns.
  „   Sept. 7   Massellon, W. A.            Kilns.
  „   Sept. 30  Horton, E.                  Earthenware for chandeliers,
                                              &c.
  „   Oct. 22   Carr, Thomas                Machinery for disintegrating
                                              clays, &c.
  „   Oct. 26   Boulton, William            Machinery for irregular
                                              shaped articles of
                                              pottery.
  „   Oct. 31   Langford, J.                Knobs and feet of vessels.
  „   Nov. 9    Sweatman, J. L. K.          Kilns.
  „   Nov. 11   Wilson, G., Jun., Wilson,
                   J., Jun.                 Kilns.
  „   Nov. 14   Harrison, William           Ovens and kilns.
  „   Nov. 30   Forbes, J. S.               Implements in pottery
                                              materials.
  „   Dec. 5    Holmes, J.                  Kilns.
  „   Dec. 12   Prince, A.                  Cementing materials used
                                              in making porcelain.
 1869 Jan. 2    Batchelor, A.               Kilns.
  „   Jan. 6    Robbins, E.                 Pottery or china
                                              manufacture.
  „   Jan. 7    Fairburn, H. E.             Machinery for compressing
                                              clay, &c.
  „   Jan. 22   Maw, A.                     Moulds for earthenware.
  „   Feb. 2    Bird, J.                    Kilns or ovens.
  „   Feb. 3    Baker, Valentine            Hot liquid vessels.
  „   Feb. 17   Round, E.                   Vessels for cooling or
                                              heating liquids.
  „   Feb. 24   Rees, George                Designs upon surface of
                                              glazed ware.
  „   March 9   Bonneville, Henry A.        New sort of porcelain.
  „   April 14  Brooman, C. E.              Apparatus for burning
                                              liquid hydrocarbon.
  „   April 19  Scott, H. Y. D.             Ovens or kilns.
  „   April 23  Lyttle, W. A.               Voltaic batteries
                                              (earthenware cells).
  „   May 19    McAdam, W.                  Manufacture of pottery.
  „   June 3    Morgan, W.                  Chemical porcelain ware.
  „   June 21   Cashin, T. F., and          Furnaces.
                  Green, J.
  „   Aug. 2    Hodge, P. R.                Vitrifying porcelain.
  „   Aug. 16   Mitchell, J.                Kilns.
  „   Aug. 16   Pinkus, Henry               Porcelain furnaces.
  „   Aug. 25   Cederwaller, A. F., and     Improvements in manufacture
                  Westerlund, A.F.            of porcelain furnace, &c.
  „   Sept. 11  Tongue, J. G.               Pottery kilns.
  „   Sept. 14  Newton, W. E.               Moulding plastic materials.
  „   Sept. 16  Bettison, William           Potter’s glaze.
  „   Sept. 28  Scott, H. Y. D.             Pottery kilns.
  „   Sept. 29  Dulake, A. S.               Improved pot or vessel for
                                              butter, &c.
  „   Oct. 14   Lesage, L. A.               Porcelain or china ware.
  „   Oct. 14   Kleven, William             Transfers for pottery.
  „   Nov. 12   Gorman, William             Pottery furnaces.
  „   Nov. 30   Ensor, Edward, jun.         Kilns.
  „   Dec. 1    Green, T. G.                Machinery for manufacture
                                              of earthenware.
  „   Dec. 7    Johnson, J. H.              Crucibles, retorts, saggars,
                                              &c.
  „   Dec. 29   Newton, W. E.               Improvements in tilting
                                              vessels and stands for
                                              same.
 1870 Feb. 10   Ferguson, F. T.             An improved jug or pitcher.
  „   March 2   Johnson, J. H.              Enamels for pottery.
  „   March 7   Wood, Edward                Potter’s glazes.
  „   March 12  Dunnachie, J.               Stoves.
  „   April 4   Baker, Worsnop and Grainge  Kilns.
  „   April 23  Morand, A.                  Kilns.
  „   May 5     Brough, William, sen. and   Ovens and kilns.
                  jun.
  „   June 23   Spence, William             Boxes for packing crockery,
                                              &c.
  „   June 29   Lee, G. S.                  Metallic jugs (porcelain
                                              lining).
  „   July 15   Gedge, W. E.                Incorporating metal and
                                              cement in construction of
                                              vases, &c.
  „   July 15   Maw, A.                     Apparatus for manufacturing
                                              tiles, &c.
  „   Aug. 30   Grosvenor, F.               Improvements in manufacture
                                              of certain articles of
                                              pottery.
   „  Oct. 15   Murray and MacFarlane       Shaping earthenware.
   „  Oct. 25   Follows and Bate            Machine for cutting
                                              vegetable substances.
   „  Nov. 3    Bewley and Cotton           Machinery for grinding.
   „  Dec. 24   Holdcroft, William          Utilisation of waste
                                              materials used in
                                              manufacture of pottery.
 1871 Jan. 25   Blackmore, J.               Earthenware cisterns.
   „  March 15  Hollins, M. D.              Plates for flat printing,
                                              &c.
   „  April 5   Newton (Spenser)            Pyrometers,
                                              linings, &c.
   „  April 8   Von Levetzow, F. C. A.      Flower-pots.
   „  April 22  Wrigley, B.                 Kilns, &c.
   „  April 29  Stocker, A. S.              Bottles and stoppers.
   „  May 27    Bowden and Shaw             Improvements in machines
                                              for planking felt hats,
                                              &c. (earthenware rollers).
   „  June 3    Chadwick, E.                Walls, floors, &c.
   „  July 12   Moffat and Henley           Kilns, &c.
   „  Aug. 18   Murray, K.                  Fences, &c. (earthenware
                                              sockets).
   „  Sept. 15  Gillespie, J.               Preparing and moulding
                                              fire-clay.
   „  Sept. 16  Chapman, G. T.              Coating with india-rubber,
                                              &c.
   „  Sept. 30  Goreham, W.                 Cement bricks, tiles,
                                              pottery, &c.
   „  Oct. 2    Varley and Varley           Telegraphs, &c.
   „ Nov. 21    Hughes (Hoggson)            Printing on enamelled
                                              surfaces.
   „  Dec. 6    Johnson (Muller)            Kilns or ovens.
 1872 Jan. 27   Newton (Morgan)             Kilns.
   „  Feb 2     Johnson (Caldwell)          Burning hydrocarbons.
   „  Feb 17    Hunt (Thompson)             Pottery ware.
   „  March 14  Smith (Martin)              Gases for heating, &c.
   „  March 18  Jackson, C.                 Sewing machine shuttles.
   „  April 8   Hermann and Laurent         Lamp shades.
   „  April 11  Lüttringhaus, G.            Cutting out metal plates,
                                              &c.
   „  May 11    Davey, G.                   Artificial ivory.
   „  May 14    Monckton, E. H. C.          Furnaces.
   „  June 21   Smith and Williams          Smelting ores and re-heating
                                              metals.
   „  June 22   Wrigley, B.                 Kilns.
   „  July 2    Thwaites, Fondeville, and
                  Bertin                    Glaze or coating for stone.
   „  Aug. 14   Lipscombe, F.               Treating noxious vapours.
   „  Aug. 16   Emmens, S. H.               Producing light and heat.
   „  Sept. 9   Lafarque, A.                Gauges.
   „  Sept. 25  Smith, G.                   Enamelling stoneware.
   „  Sept. 25  Hughes (Wilbaux)            Printing, impressing, or
                                              enamelling paper, &c.
   „  Oct. 16   Tugby, H.                   Kilns for bricks.
   „  Oct. 17   Stocker, A. R.              Appendages for feeding
                                              bottles.
   „  Oct. 23   Goss, W. H.                 Moulding ceramic materials.
   „  Oct. 23   Menet, Gally, Oswald, and
                  Peigner                   Imitation ceramic ware.
   „  Oct. 30   March, T. C.                Applying glass, &c., to
                                              ornament furniture.
   „  Oct. 30   Perry, G.                   Presses for moulding glass,
                                              &c.
   „  Nov. 8    Bonneville (Avril)          Furnaces.
   „  Nov. 11   Scott, H. Y. D.             Treating sewage.
   „  Nov. 27   Ensor, E.                   Drying bricks, pottery, &c.
   „  Dec. 2    Newton (Tilghman)           Cutting, &c., hard
                                              substances.
   „  Dec. 3    Bacon, J.                   Brick and other kilns.
   „  Dec. 11   Claus, C.                   Bricks, blocks, tiles, &c.
 1873 Jan. 4    Whitburn, T.                Printing.
   „  Jan. 20   Bacon, J.                   Drying bricks, pottery, &c.
   „  Feb. 4    Derham (Morand)             Kilns.
   „  Feb. 5    Hunt (Colfs Heyne)          Kilns.
   „  Feb. 25   Stocker, A. R.              Caps and stoppers for
                                              bottles.
   „  Feb. 28   Engledue, W. J.             Drying peat, china clay, &c.
   „  March 1   Smith, G.                   Kilns or ovens.
   „  March 6   Philipps, G.                Drying and roasting grain,
                                              &c.
   „  March 12  Wood, G.                    Furnaces.
   „  March 15  Robey, Banks, and Forester  Kilns.
   „  April 4   Bonner, S.                  Kilns.
   „  April 9   Ecroyd and Worss            Furnaces.
   „  April 12  Weigelin, G.                Drying bricks, &c.
   „  April 17  Nicklin and Frost           Kilns.
   „  April 18  Hunt (Mendheim)             Firing ceramic ware.
   „  April 22  Billups and Lee             Photographic pictures on
                                              porcelain.
   „  April 22  Torr and Johnstone          Furnaces.
   „  April 23  Haggett. W.                 Treating metals to increase
                                              their strength.
   „  April 23  Klüh, S.                    Printing in colours on
                                              earthenware, &c.
   „  April 26  Minton, T. W.               Ovens for pottery, &c.
   „  April 29  Barrow and Barrow           Kilns.
   „  May 7     Skelton and Mobberley       Furnaces.
   „  May 9     Cowdery, G.                 Bricks, kilns, and
                                              buildings.
   „  May 10    Minton                      Ovens for pottery.
   „  May 31    Ray (Heilmann)              Furnaces.
   „  June 6    Bodmer and Bodmer           Extracting moisture from
                                              potters’ clay.
   „  June 12   Frèret (Goddard)            Designs on porcelain.
   „  June 16   Robbins, E.                 Cements, &c.
   „  June 19   Harrison, F.                Cements, &c.
   „  Oct. 4    Rice, J.                    Vessels for liquids.
   „  Nov. 4    Dean, W.                    Ornamenting or graining
                                              wood.
   „  Nov. 12   Hyatt, T.                   Applying asbestos.
   „  Nov. 15   Hornblower, L.              Fireproof buildings.
   „  Dec. 11   Burroughes, J. S.           Billiard rests and boards.
   „  Dec. 23   Holland                     Fireproof cements and
                                              bricks.
 1874 Jan. 21   Maw, A.                     Constructing moulds or dies.
   „  Feb. 5    Hyatt, T.                   Asbestos saggers.
   „  Feb 7     Rose, L.                    Earthenware bottles.
   „  Feb. 12   Harlow, B.                  Printers’ stoves.
   „  Feb. 25   Baggeley, H.                Composition for gas and
                                              water pipes.
   „  Feb. 27   Brown, J.                   Ornamenting.
   „  March 27  Jensen (Erichson and        Kilns.
                  Maardt)
   „  March 31  Boulton, W.                 Potters’ clay.
   „  April 1   Lee, E.                     Ornamental designs.
   „  April 2   Cleghorn and Paterson       Asbestos cloth for
                                              enamelling.
   „  April 2   Clark, J. K.                Treating clay slip.
   „  May 1     Bull, W.                    Pottery kiln.
   „  May 4     Brock, C.                   Ornamenting.
   „  May 18    Clark (Jackson)             Suspending crockery in
                                              kilns.
   „  May 30    Ivimey (Long)               Packing crockery.
   „  June 11   Cliff, W. D.                Heavy articles in clay.
   „  June 23   Buchan, A. W.               Shaping clay.
   „  July 15   Holland, W. T.              Salt-glazing clay goods.
   „  July 20   Alsing (Edwards)            Pulverising porcelain waste.
   „  July 22   Perry, A.                   Cockle stove for drying
                                              pottery.
   „  July 24   Ivimey (Long)               Packing china.
   „  July 27   Lee, E.                     Ornamenting.
   „  July 30   Durand, A.                  Decorating.
   „  Sept. 8   Scott, W. S.                Separating water from slip.
   „  Sept. 15  Morgan Brown (Hansen)       Depositing metals on
                                              earthenware.
   „  Sept. 17  Hyatt, T.                   Sheets for holding
                                              porcelain.
   „  Sept. 21  Whitehead, J.               Pipe and sanitary tube
                                              making machine.
   „  Oct. 7    Murray and Crighton         Bottles, &c.
   „  Oct. 8    Holyoake, W. R.             Printing, transferring
                                              designs, &c.
   „  Oct. 8    Codd, H.                    Serrated liquid bottle.
   „  Oct. 28   Gedge (Guelton & Co.)       Imitation “faience
                                              parisienne.”
   „  Nov. 11   Ramsey, H. W.               Stoneware pipes.
   „  Nov. 17   Williams, S. de la G.       Kilns.
   „  Dec. 17   Clark (Ulmann)              Imitation china, &c.
 1875 Feb. 6    Webster, L.                 Applying earthenware to
                                              milling machines.
   „  Feb. 26   Brown, J.                   Ornamenting.
   „  March 23  Malpas, C.                  Kilns.
   „  April 7   Holyoake, W. R.             Printing.
   „  April 24  Bonneville (Perlau)         Protecting articles of
                                              earthenware.
   „  April 28  Gedge (Guelton & Co.)       Imitation “faience
                                              parisienne.”
   „  May 7     Gaskell, J.                 Rotary tool holder.
   „  May 8     D’Humy, J. R. de F.         Combining ceramic ware with
                                              glass, &c.
   „  May 10    Napier, J. M.               Tools for potters’ clay.
   „  May 11    Hill, J.                    Separating clay from water.
   „  May 11    Bartlett and Murray         Designs for pottery.
   „  May 22    Mariotti, L.                Earthenware covers.
   „  May 27    Holyoake, W. R.             Ink and transferring
                                              designs.
   „  June 22   Brock, C.                   Mural fresco paintings,
                                              decorating, &c.
   „  June 23   Batchelar, A.               Kilns.
   „  July 6    De la Perrelle (Guerin)     Jars for cooking, &c.
   „  Sept. 21  Monckton, E. H. C.          Annealing glass as a
                                              substitute.
   „  Sept. 30  Murray and Crighton         Shaping bottles, &c.
   „  Oct. 1    Rhodes, J.                  China-ware suspenders.
   „  Oct. 21   Paget, H. S.                Machine for china painting.
   „  Dec. 2    Boulton, W.                 Grinding materials.
   „  Dec. 2    Cliff, W. D.                Carriages for use in making
                                              retorts.
   „  Dec. 2    Clamond, C.                 Waterproofing baked clays.
   „  Dec. 6    Jackson, Hy.                Drying, or partially
                                              drying, bottles.
 1876 Jan. 25   Miller, J.                  Designs on pottery.
   „  Jan. 25   Green, T. G.                Machinery for potters’ bats.
   „  Feb. 7    Tucker and Hodson           Kilns.
   „  Feb. 11   Humy, P. R. de F.           Manufacture of earthenware
                                              articles.
   „  Feb. 28   Dennison, J. W.             Earthenware pipes.
   „  March 27  Ford, C.                    Preparing clay.
   „  April 20  Heuer, F. W.                Printing on ceramic
                                              articles.
   „  April 28  Vatcher, H.                 Manufacture of porcelain.
   „  May 31    Wood, J.                    Moulding and shaping.
   „  June 3    Taylor, T.                  Driving potters’ lathes.
   „  July 17   Brock, C.                   Imitation stones.
   „  Sept. 14  Vernon, J.                  Decanters, &c.
   „  Oct. 10   Siemens and Hesse           Improvements in pottery and
                                              other kilns.
   „  Oct. 26   Binns, R. W. and C. F.      Heating kilns.
   „  Oct. 31   Faucheux d’Humy, P. R. de   Ornamentation.
   „  Nov. 7    Blake and Tebbs             Manufacture of pots.
   „  Nov. 21   Smith, J.                   Sanitary pottery pipes.
   „  Nov. 21   Wirth, F.                   Drying bricks, &c.
   „  Dec. 20   Michele, V. D.              Kilns.
 1877 Jan. 10   Carr, J.                    Bleaching china clays.
   „  Feb. 23   Pratt, F. E.                Oven for pottery.
   „  Feb. 24   Cameron and Rockliffe       Flower-pots and saucers.
   „  Feb. 28   Boulton, W.                 Machinery.
   „  March 21  Webb, W. G.                 Ornamenting.
   „  March 26  Batchelor, H. C.            Coating casks, protecting
                                              metals, &c.
   „  March 28  Leak and Edwards            Supporting pottery in kilns.
   „  March 31  Campbell Minton, T. W.
                  and H.                    Surfacing and ornamenting
                                              tiles, &c.
   „  April 21  Leak, H.                    Moulds.
   „  May 22    Clark, A. M.                Ornamenting.
   „  May 23    Cooke, Alexander, and       Improvements in manufacture
                  Sheridan                    of china, &c.
   „  June 30   Kerr, W. H.                 Materials for porcelain, &c.
   „  July 26   Wood, J.                    Shaping and moulding.
   „  Aug. 21   Okolowicz, A. A. X.         Colouring porcelain.
   „  Sept. 11  Guest, E. and T.            Ornamenting.




                            GENERAL INDEX.


    Aërial zone, i. 491

    Alderholt pottery, ii. 454

    Aldgate pottery, i. 157

    Ale-pots, i. 92

    Alfreton potteries, ii. 133

    Aller pottery, i. 348

    Alnwick potteries, ii. 17

    Alloa pottery, ii. 521

    Amblecote pottery, ii. 456

    Amphoræ, i. 55, 57

    Ancient British pottery, i. 2–23

    Anglo-Saxon banquet, i. 65, 77, 82
      glass, i. 68
      house, i. 65
      MSS., i. 65 _et seq._, 77, 82
      pottery, i. 64–75
      tables, i. 78

    Annfield pottery, ii. 515

    Armitage potteries, ii. 434

    Aylesford potteries, ii. 457


    Barrowfield pottery, ii. 516

    Barrows, pottery of, i. 2–75; ii. 459–470, 500–504

    Basin, Roman, i. 59

    Bear drinking-vessel, i. 420–421

    Belfast potteries, ii. 483–485

    Bell Works, ii. 247

    Bellarmine, i. 92, 128

    Belleek china and earthenware, ii. 486–498

    Belle-Vue pottery, i. 464–466

    Belper potteries, ii. 125–127

    Benthall tiles and pottery, i. 307

    Bideford ovens, i. 346–347
      pottery, i. 346

    Billingsley, notice and pedigree, ii. 101 _et seq._, 447–451

    Bishop Auckland pottery, ii. 12

    Bit-stoneware, i. 111

    Blackfriars Road, i. 153

    Blackwall potteries, i. 162

    Bolingbroke pottery, i. 438

    Boness pottery, ii. 520

    Boscobel and the Royal Oak, i. 263

    Bourne Valley pottery, i. 413

    Bovey Tracey pottery, i. 343–346

    Bow, books of, i. 209
      china works, i. 113, 198–214
      discoveries at, i. 203

    Brampton potteries, ii. 116–122

    Branksea pottery, i. 413

    Bread, Anglo-Saxon, i. 78

    Bridgeton pottery, ii. 515

    Brislington pottery, i. 406

    Bristol china, i. 350–405
      delft-ware, i. 350–356
      glass, i. 403
      Temple Backs, i. 398
      salt glaze pottery, i. 405
      St. Thomas’ and Temple, i. 402

    Broseley Blue Dragon, i. 268
      clay and pipes, i. 43, 263, 290–299
      tileries, i. 317

    Broughton, Spencer, gibbeted, i. 524

    Brownhills potteries, ii. 287 _et seq._

    Broxbourne terra cotta, i. 427

    Building tiles, i. 60

    Burial customs, Roman, i. 62

    Burley Hill pottery, i. 76

    Burslem, Pot-works at, ii. 236–297
      earthenware gravestones, ii. 238
      potteries at, ii. 236–297
      Wedgwood Institute, i. 435

    Burton-on-Trent china, ii. 156
      pottery, ii. 155

    Bust of L. Jewitt, ii. 227
      S. C. Hall, ii. 227

    Butter-pots, i. 95–96


    Cadborough pottery, i. 456

    Cadogan tea-pots, i. 219

    Canton, New, i. 199

    Caolin, i. 322 _et seq._
      Cookworthy’s account of, i. 324

    Cardigan potteries, ii. 451

    Cardowan potteries, ii. 516

    Castle Espie pottery, ii. 486

    Castleford pottery, i. 485

    Castor-ware, i. 28–33, 49

    Caughley china, &c., i. 196, 263–273
      Place, i. 269

    Cauldon Place potteries, ii. 318 _et seq._

    Celtic pottery, i. 2–23

    Champion, life and works, i. 335–337, 356–397

    Cheam pottery, i. 167

    Chelsea, articles made at, i. 180–189
      buns, i. 168
      china works, i. 168–198; ii. 70 _et seq._
      pensioners, i. 168
      pottery, i. 198
      second china works, i. 196
      Wedgwood’s works, i. 196

    Chesterfield potteries, ii. 115–116

    China tokens, i. 254; ii. 141

    Chiselhurst pottery, i. 167

    Church Gresley potteries, ii. 159, 166

    Churchyard works, ii. 244

    Cinerary urns, i. 2–16, 59, 67 _et seq._; ii. 458 _et seq._,
        500–504

    Clay coffin, i. 61, 63
      coin moulds, i. 63

    Clays, Cornish, i. 322 _et seq._; ii. 35 _et seq._, 187
      Devonshire, i. 343
      Dorsetshire, i. 414
      Oxfordshire, i. 120
      Staffordshire, i. 97
      table of, ii. 455

    Clyde potteries, ii. 518

    Coades’ wares, i. 138 _et seq._

    Coalbrookdale terra cotta, i. 299

    Coalmoor, pottery, i. 317

    Coalport china, i. 263, 273–290

    Coalville pottery, i. 422

    Coatbridge potteries, ii. 516

    Cobridge, Potteries at, ii. 290–297

    Cock-pit Hill pottery, ii. 56–60

    Codnor Castle, ii. 127
      Park potteries, ii. 127

    Coffee, i. 139–141; ii. 97, 98

    Coffin, clay, i. 61, 63

    Coin moulds, i. 63

    Coke’s china, i. 136–144

    Colchester pottery, i. 46
      vase, i. 35, 37

    Coleorton pottery, ii. 166

    Cologne ware, i. 92

    Combed ware, i. 98

    Cookworthy, life and works, i. 318–337, 356

    Copeland family, ii. 167 _et seq._

    Copeland’s works, ii. 167–184

    Cornish clay, discovery of, i. 322 _et seq._; ii. 35 _et seq._, 168

    Cossey terra cotta, i. 455

    Costrils, i. 87

    Costume pottery, ii. 153

    Coventry pottery, i. 427

    Cradle, i. 105

    Craft’s china, i. 201

    Crannog pottery, ii. 471 _et seq._

    Cremation (_see_ “Cinerary Urns”)

    Crews Hole pottery, i. 407

    Crich pottery, ii. 133–135

    Crispe’s china, i. 153, 157–160

    Crouch ware, i. 95, 101

    Cruskin, i. 88


    Dale Abbey tiles, ii. 144

    Dale Hall potteries, ii. 261 _et seq._

    Davenport’s china, ii. 283–288

    Denaby pottery, i. 526

    Denby potteries, ii. 126, 128–132

    Deptford pottery, i. 165

    Derby china (_see_ “Bow,” “Chelsea,” “Kentish Town,” “Vauxhall,”
        “Worcester,” “Nantgarw,” “Derby,” &c.), ii. 57–166
      Cock-pit Hill pottery, ii. 56–60
      Earls of, i. 79
      elections, ii. 73
      “hands” employed, ii. 94–114

    Derbyshire potteries, i. 68–74, 76–82; ii. 56–166

    Devonshire potteries, i. 318–348

    Ditchling terra cotta, ii. 456

    Divining rod, i. 321

    Doe, suicide of, i. 137

    Don pottery, i. 519 _et seq._

    Dorsetshire pottery, i. 50, 411

    Doulton’s wares, i. 144–151

    Dowsing rod, i. 321

    Drinking vessels, i. 3, 16–18

    Droitwich kilns, ii. 150

    Dublin, potteries of, ii. 478–483

    Dumbarton potteries, ii. 519

    Dungannon pottery, ii. 485

    Durobrivian ware, i. 28

    Dwight’s china, &c., i. 98, 114, 118–132


    Earthenware gravestones, ii. 238, 239

    Earthenware ovens, i. 346–348

    Easton pottery, i. 407

    Ebisham bricks, i. 454

    Eckington potteries, ii. 125

    Edinburgh potteries, ii. 519

    Electric telegraph, i. 491

    Elers ware, i. 99

    Encaustic tiles, Bathurst’s, i. 317
      Boote’s, ii. 255
      Camm’s, ii. 454
      Craven, Dunnil & Co., i. 305
      Godwin’s, ii. 452
      Hollin’s, ii. 213–218
      Malkin, Edge, & Co., ii. 260
      Maw & Co., i. 307
      mediæval, ii. 144–150
      Minton Taylor, &c., ii. 228 _et seq._
      Minton’s, ii. 185 _et seq._
      Poole, i. 411
      Stephan’s, i. 305
      St. John’s, i. 258; ii. 144–150
      Webb’s, i. 258

    Encaustic vases, ii. 357

    Essex pottery, i. 53

    Etruria works, ii. 345–385

    Euston Road terra-cotta, i. 219

    Ewell pottery, i. 166

    Exeter pipes, ii. 457
      pottery, i. 343


    Fairy pipes, i. 296

    Feeding bottles, i. 52, 53

    Fenton, potteries at, ii. 409–422

    Ferrars, Earls of Derby, i. 79, 80
      pitcher, i. 79

    Ferrybridge pottery, i. 495

    Fireplaces, i. 315

    Flaxman’s works, ii. 364 _et seq._

    Florence Court pottery, ii. 485

    Foley, potteries at, ii. 408–422

    Food vessels, i. 18–21; ii. 458 _et seq._, 500–4

    Frankish pottery, i. 68

    Fremington potteries, i. 347–348

    Fulguri-polygraph, i. 490

    Fulham wares, i. 98, 114, 118–132
      Bailey’s works, i. 131
      Dwight’s recipe books, i. 125

    Funeral garlands, i. 62


    Garnkirk pottery, ii. 507

    Gartcosh pottery, ii. 508

    Gateshead potteries, ii. 6

    Geometric tiles (_see_ “Encaustic tiles”)

    George IV. at Wentworth, i. 219

    Gestingthorpe tiles, i. 458

    Gibbeted man, i. 524

    Giles, of Kentish Town, i. 214–218

    Gladiatorial combats, i. 37

    Glasgow potteries, ii. 505–516
      delft ware, ii. 505

    Glenboig works, ii. 516

    Godet, or Goddard, i. 89

    Goss’s china and parian, ii. 225 _et seq._

    Grangemouth potteries, ii. 517

    Grave mounds, pottery of the, i. 2–75, 459–470, 500–504

    Gravel Lane potteries, i. 161

    Gravestones of earthenware, ii. 238, 239

    Grenades, i. 106

    Greenock potteries, ii. 518

    Greenwich artificial stone, i. 162
      china, i. 162

    Gresley potteries, ii. 159, 166

    Grotesque knights, &c., i. 84


    Hammersmith pottery, i. 220

    Hampshire pottery, i. 44

    Hancock, notice of, i. 230; ii. 93, 109

    Hancock’s work (_see_ “Worcester” and “Caughley”)

    Hand grenades, i. 106

    Hanley, potteries at, ii., 298–344

    Hartshorne potteries, ii. 160–166

    Headington pottery, i. 46

    Heathfield pottery, ii. 508–516

    Hebrides, potteries of the, ii. 522–523

    Herculaneum pottery, ii. 44–50

    Herefordshire potteries, ii. 452

    Holdship’s blue printing, i. 229 _et seq._; ii. 89
      notice of i. 225 _et seq._; ii. 89
      poem to, i. 230

    Holkham terra-cotta, i. 458

    Holmes’ pottery, i. 519

    Honiton pottery, i. 343

    Horspath tobacco-pipes, i. 459

    Hounslow china, i. 161, 166
      pottery, i. 161, 166

    Hoxton pottery, i. 220

    Hull pottery, i. 461–466

    Hunting subjects, i. 33

    Hylton pottery, ii. 8


    Ilkeston potteries, ii. 135

    Immolation urns, i. 21–23; ii. 460–470, 502–504

    Indiho pottery, i. 344

    Ipswich artificial stone, i. 162–165, 455
      Orwell works, i. 163

    Ireland, potteries of, ii. 459–498

    Irish pottery and potteries, ii. 459–498

    Isleworth china, i. 161
      pottery, i. 161

    Ivy House works, ii. 249


    Jackfield encaustic tiles, i. 305–307
      pottery, i. 304

    Jewitt, A., notice of his pottery, ii. 123–125

    Jewry Wall, Leicester, i. 58


    Kaolin, i. 324

    Kent potteries, i. 24

    Kentish Town china, &c., i. 214–218
      Giles, i. 214–218

    Kilnhurst pottery, i. 526

    Kilns, potters, Ashdon, i. 53
      Burley Hill, i. 76
      Castor, i. 29
      Colchester, i. 42
      London, i. 39
      New Forest, i. 42
      Stamford, i. 431
      tile, ii. 144–150
      Wilderspool, i. 42
      Winterton, i. 53

    King’s Newton pottery, i. 64–75; ii. 154, 155

    Kinson pottery, i. 413

    Kirkcaldy potteries, ii. 520

    Knights, mounted, i. 84


    Lake dwellings, ii. 471 _et seq._

    Lambeth, Coades, i. 136
      pottery, i. 138–153
      delft-ware, i. 133 _et seq._

    Lambeth, Griffiths, i. 136
      Doe, i. 137
      Stiff and Sons, i. 140
      Doultons, i. 144
      Waters, i. 150
      Green & Co., i. 151
      Crispe, i. 153

    Lamps, i. 62, 63

    Lancashire pottery, i. 51; ii. 18–55

    Landore pottery, ii. 444

    Lane End, potteries at, ii. 421, 422

    Llanelly potteries, ii. 444, 445

    Langley Mills pottery, ii. 135

    Larne pottery, ii. 485

    Layerthorpe pottery, i. 461

    Leeds pottery, i. 466–485

    Leicester terra-cotta, ii. 456

    Lichfield pipes, ii. 434

    Lincoln pottery, ii. 457

    Lincolnshire pottery, i. 53; ii. 457

    Little Chester pottery, ii. 150

    Littler’s china, ii. 287, 422

    Liverpool china, ii. 34
      potteries, ii. 18–50
      delft-ware, ii. 18–50
      Sadler and Green’s printing, ii. 27
      crest of, ii. 49

    London, potteries in, i. 119–220
      tile kilns, ii. 148–150

    Longport, potteries at, ii. 283–288

    Longton, potteries at, &c., ii. 386–422

    Lowesby pottery, i. 421

    Lowestoft china, i. 439–454
      pottery, i. 439 _et seq._


    Madeley china, i. 303

    Market Bosworth terra-cotta, i. 423

    Marsh Balden pottery, i. 459

    Mask, i. 51, 52

    Malvern tile kiln, ii. 148

    Mammiform bottles, i. 87, 88

    Mayer museum, &c., ii. 19–55

    Mediæval pottery, i. 83–98; ii. 471–478, 504–505

    Mexborough pottery, i. 517

    Middlesborough potteries, ii. 16

    Millwall Works, i. 160

    Minton’s pottery and china, ii. 185–218

    Monkwearmouth potteries, ii. 11

    Mortaria, i. 47, 59

    Mortlake pottery, i. 160

    Mortlock’s delft-ware, i. 160

    Mosaic tiles (_see_ “Encaustic tiles”)

    Mould pottery, i. 46


    Nantgarw china, ii. 447–451

    New Canton, i. 199

    New Forest pottery, i. 44

    Newbold potteries, ii. 125

    Newbottle pottery, ii. 12

    Newcastle-on-Tyne potteries, ii. 1–8

    Newcastle-under-Lyme potteries, ii. 433 _et seq._

    New Canton (_see_ “Bow”)

    New Hall, ii. 302 _et seq._

    Nonsuch pottery, i. 166

    Norman pottery, i. 76–82

    Northamptonshire potteries, i. 28

    Nottingham bears, i. 420
      potters, i. 416, 417
      ware, i. 415–421

    Nuneaton terra cotta, i. 427

    Nuneham Courtenay pottery, i. 459


    Oade, outrage by, i. 161

    Old Hall, ii. 311 _et seq._

    Orange jumper, i. 521

    Osmotherley pottery, i. 461

    Ouseburn pottery, ii. 3

    Ovens of earthenware, i. 346–348

    Oxfordshire pottery, i. 46

    Oxford Street, Mortlock’s, i. 219, 220


    Paisley, potteries at, ii. 517

    Pancheons, i. 44

    Patents and Specifications,--
      List of, from 1626 to 1877; ii. 523–536
      Bell, i. 110
      Benson, i. 109, 110
      Billin, i, 109
      Champion, i. 361, 375
      Cookworthy, i. 115, 329, 361
      Count de Lauraguais, i. 114
      Cartledge, i. 115
      Crease, i. 115
      De la Mayne, i. 116
      Dwight, i. 98, 114, 118, 121
      Frye, i. 113, 198
      Heylin, i. 112
      Ramsey, i. 91
      Redrich and Jones, i. 109
      Rous, i. 90
      Shawe, i. 110
      Simpson, i. 89
      Van Hamme, i. 98
      Wedgwood, i. 115, 116
      Williamson and Spackman, i. 114

    Pedigree of Billingsley, ii. 101

    Pednandrea works, i. 349

    Penates, i. 62

    Pennæpolygraph, i. 491

    Penkhull potteries, ii. 454

    Pilgrim’s bottles, i. 87

    Pinxton china, ii. 94–97, 137–144

    Pipes, tobacco, i. 263, 290–299, 459; ii. 432, 434, 456, 457
      clay, i. 326

    Planché’s china, ii. 64 _et seq._

    Place’s Ware, i. 460

    Plymouth china, i. 318–338
      earthenware, i. 338

    Polesworth terra cotta, i. 4, 23

    Pontefract pottery, i. 489
      cakes, i. 489

    Poole pottery, i. 411

    Porringer, i. 80, 89

    Port Dundas pottery, ii. 513–515

    Portland vase, ii. 365

    Portobello pottery, ii. 519

    Posset pots, i. 107, 418; ii. 117, 118, 119

    Potovens pottery, i. 528

    Pottery, Celtic, i. 2–23; ii. 459 _et seq._
      Anglo Saxon, i, 64–75
      Crannog, ii. 471 _et seq._
      English, works, i. 83–528; ii. 1–452
      Frankish, i. 68
      Irish, i. 98; ii. 459–498
      Mediæval, i. 83–98
      Norman, i. 76–82
      Romano-British, i. 24–63
      Scottish, ii. 499–523
      Welsh, ii. 435–452

    Prescot potteries, ii. 54

    Prestonpans pottery, ii. 521

    Printing (_see_ “Transfer”)

    Puzzle jugs, i. 106, 480; ii. 117, 118, 119


    Randall, notice of, i. 303

    Rawmarsh pottery, i. 519

    Reading pottery, ii. 455

    Repton tile kilns, &c., ii. 144–150

    Robinson Crusoe, i. 130

    Rockingham china, &c., i. 495 _et seq._

    Romano-British pottery, i. 24–63

    Roman wall, i. 58
      tiles, i. 58, 59, 60
      tile tombs, i. 60–63
      lamps, i. 62, 63

    Rotherham pottery, i. 519

    Runcorn potteries, ii. 53

    Rutherglen potteries, ii. 519

    Rye pottery, i. 457


    Salopian pottery, i. 42, 196, 263–317

    Salt glaze, discovery of, i. 94

    Samian wares, i. 33, 39, 46, 47, 50, 51

    Scottish pottery and china, i. 214, 499

    Seacombe pottery, ii. 54

    Seaham pottery, ii. 13

    Sepulchral urns (_see_ “Cinerary”)

    Severn Valley, potteries of the, i. 42, 263–317
      accident in, i. 277

    Shelton, potteries at, ii. 298–344

    Sheriff-Hutton potteries, ii. 6

    Shields potteries, ii. 7

    Shipley potteries, ii. 132

    Shotover tobacco pipes, i. 459

    Shropshire pottery, i. 42, 263–317

    Smethwick tiles, ii. 454

    Somersetshire potteries, i. 350–415

    Songs of potters, i. 230, 399, 400; ii. 9, 43

    Southwark potteries, i. 161

    Southwick potteries, ii. 10

    Spode’s pottery and china, ii. 167 _et seq._

    Stratford china, i. 214

    Stepney pottery, i. 162

    Stepney Bank pottery, ii. 3
      china, i. 162

    Stone pots, i. 90

    St. Helen’s potteries, ii. 54

    Stourbridge potteries, i. 260–262

    Stamford terra cotta, i. 431

    Stockton potteries, i. 12

    Stoke-upon-Trent, potteries at, &c., ii. 167–235

    Stowmarket “white bricks,” i. 454

    Sun-dried urns, i. 4

    Sussex pigs, i. 458
      potteries, i. 456 _et seq._

    Sutton pottery, ii. 53

    Swinton pottery, i. 495 _et seq._

    Swadlincote potteries, ii. 156–159

    Swansea potteries, ii. 435–451


    Tamworth terra cotta, i. 424

    Tees, potteries of the, ii. 12–17

    Telegraph, invention of electric, i. 491

    Tesselated pavements (_see_ “Encaustic tiles”)

    Tetinæ, i. 52, 53

    Tickenhall potteries, ii. 151–153

    Tile tombs, i. 61 _et seq._

    Tiles, Encaustic (_see_ “Encaustic tiles”)
      Roman, i. 58–63

    Tobacco pipes (_see_ “Pipe”)

    Toby Fill-pot, ii. 157

    Toft dishes, &c., i. 102; ii. 239

    Tokens, i. 351; ii. 141

    Torquay terra cotta, ii. 452–454

    Transfer printing, i. 229, 271; ii. 27

    Tumblers, i. 68

    Tunstall, potteries at, ii. 423–431

    Tygs, i. 104

    Tyne, potteries of the, ii. 1–8


    Upchurch ware, i. 24


    Vauxhall pottery, i. 157

    Verreville pottery, ii. 506

    Virgula Divina, i. 321–322


    Wakefield pottery, i. 527; ii. 455

    Wales, potteries of, ii. 435–452

    Wall, Dr., notice of, i. 222

    Warmstrey house, i. 224

    Warrington pottery, i. 51; ii. 50–53

    Watcombe terra cotta, i. 338–343

    Wath-upon-Dearne pottery, i. 527

    Watt, James, ii. 505

    Wear, potteries of the, ii. 8–12

    Wedgwood, Burslem potteries of, ii. 244–251
      Etruria works, &c., ii. 345–385
      family, ii. 345–385
      Ralph, notice of, i. 490

    Wedgwood’s case of Staffordshire potteries, i. 371
      opposition to Champion, i. 360 _et seq._

    Wednesbury pottery, ii. 456

    Welch potteries, ii. 435–452

    Westbury pottery, i. 407

    Weston-super-Mare terra cotta, i. 408

    Whittington potteries, ii. 122–125
      Revolution house, ii. 122

    Wilderspool pottery, i. 51

    Willow pattern, i. 268

    Wilnecote terra cotta, i. 424

    Winchester pipes, ii. 456

    Wirksworth china, ii. 142–144

    Wisbech pottery, i. 438

    Witchcraft, ii. 457

    Wooden Box potteries, ii. 160–166

    Woodville potteries, ii. 160–166

    Worcester china, i. 221–262

    Worcester gloves, i. 221

    Worcester, Grainger’s works, i. 254
      Royal porcelain works, i. 221–254
      sauce, i. 221
      St. George’s works, i. 258
      St. John’s encaustic tiles, i. 258
      tokens, i. 254
      Webb’s tileries, i. 258

    Wrotham pottery, i. 454


    Yarmouth pottery, i. 455

    Ynismudw pottery, ii. 445–447

    York china, i. 461
      pottery, i. 44, 46, 460

    Yorkshire potteries, i. 460–528

    Youghall pottery, ii. 485




                       INDEX OF NAMES OF PLACES.


    Abberley, i. 224

    Aberdeen, ii. 500

    Aintree, ii. 28, 44

    Aldborough, i. 61, 63

    Alderholt, ii. 454

    Alderwasley, ii. 143

    Aldgate, i. 133, 134, 157–160, 166

    Alfreton, ii. 104, 133

    Aller, i. 348

    Allerthorpe, i. 528

    Alloa, ii. 521

    Alnwick, ii. 17

    Alsager, ii. 247, 288

    Altegarron, ii. 460, 467, 470

    Alton Towers, ii. 199

    Alverthorpe, i. 528

    Amblecote, i. 260, 261; ii. 456

    Ancaster, i. 56

    Andenwood, i. 44

    Annfield, ii. 515

    Armitage, ii. 432, 434

    Arpley Moor, ii. 53

    Arthurlie, ii. 155

    Arundel, i. 512

    Ashbourne, ii. 109

    Ashby-de-la-Zouch, ii. 161, 163

    Ashby Holes, ii. 160

    Ashdon, i. 53

    Ashmolean, i. 67, 83, 84, 120

    Ashover, ii. 116

    Ashwood, ii. 139

    Astbury, ii. 351

    Aston, ii. 95

    Attercliffe, i. 524

    Aylesford, ii. 457


    Baddaley Edge, i. 96–98

    Bagnall, i. 94; ii. 297

    Ballidon Moor, i. 4

    Ballon Hill, ii. 461, 466, 470

    Ballybit, ii. 464

    Ballydoolough, ii. 462, 472–475

    Ballyshannon, ii. 487

    Banchory, ii. 501

    Bangor, ii. 397

    Barlaston, i. 303; ii. 357, 372

    Barnstaple, i. 347

    Barrow, i. 266

    Barrowfield, ii. 516

    Basford, i. 420

    Bath, i. 237, 295, 407; ii. 65, 68

    Battersea, i. 169, 211, 230, 232–235; ii. 27

    Belfast, ii. 467, 479, 483, 484, 487

    Belhelvie, ii. 500, 501

    Belleek, ii. 227, 486–498

    Belper, ii. 111, 125–127, 129

    Benthall, i. 264, 307–317

    Berkeley, i. 397

    Berwick, ii. 505

    Bewdley, i. 261

    Bideford, i. 346–348

    Bilbro’, ii. 455

    Birchwood, ii. 128

    Birmingham, i. 200, 433; ii. 62, 98, 110, 114, 194, 334

    Bishop Auckland, ii. 12

    Bishopthorpe, i. 507

    Blackfriars Road, i. 153, 432

    Blackheath, i. 202

    Blackley, i. 115

    Blackwood, ii. 346

    Boconnoc, i. 322, 323

    Bolingbroke, i. 438; ii. 455

    Boness, ii. 520, 521

    Boroughbridge, ii. 142

    Borthwick, ii. 502

    Boscawen-Un, i. 13

    Boscobel, i. 263

    Bosporthennis, i. 13

    Bosworth, i. 423, 424

    Botham, i. 41

    Bourne Valley, i. 413

    Bovey-Tracey, i. 343–346

    Bow, i. 111–113, 153, 162, 169, 177, 195, 198–214, 221, 223, 395,
        443; ii. 68, 70, 74, 505

    Bradwell, i. 99; ii. 283

    Braintree, i. 458

    Brampton, i. 41, 108, 421, 458; ii. 115–125, 127, 135

    Branksea, i. 413

    Bransford, i. 490

    Breadsall, ii. 369

    Bredenham, i. 224

    Brettell Lane, i. 260

    Brickhill, ii. 455

    Bridgeton, ii. 515

    Bridgnorth, i. 264; ii. 111

    Brigg, i. 53

    Brighton, i. 153, 163, 353

    Brislington, i. 403, 406

    Bristol, i. 116, 130, 136–138, 142, 209, 226, 261, 327, 331, 333,
        335–339, 343, 350–407, 410, 424, 425, 442, 446; ii. 302
        _et seq._, 364, 448, 515, 519

    Brixton, i. 41

    Broad Down, i. 9, 15, 21, 22

    Broadwas, i. 265

    Brookhill, ii. 141

    Broseley, i. 258, 263 _et seq._, 290–317; ii. 105, 110, 111, 185,
        268

    Broughton, i. 265

    Brownhills, i. 94; ii. 287, 422, 429

    Broxbourne, i. 428–431

    Bug Hole, i. 260

    Bugthorpe, ii. 455

    Buildwas, i. 263

    Bundoran, ii. 487

    Burley Hill, i. 78, 80, 415

    Burslem, i. 94, 97, 99, 100, 101, 110, 111, 153–155, 466, 489, 490,
        524, 526; ii. 30, 31, 106, 167, 236–297, 304, 345, 346
        _et seq._, 418, 428, 429, 436

    Burton-on-Trent, ii. 98, 109, 155, 156, 159, 160, 163

    Buttercrain, ii. 455

    Butterley, ii. 127, 128

    Butt House, ii. 156

    Buxton, ii. 139

    Byerley Hall, ii. 369


    Cadborough, i. 456, 457, 458

    Caerphilly, ii. 139, 451

    Cairn Thierna, ii. 462, 467

    Calais Wold, i. 11

    Calke, ii. 151

    Camden, i. 394

    Cannock, ii. 66

    Cardiff, ii. 451

    Cardigan, ii. 451, 452

    Cardowan, ii. 516

    Carrickfergus, ii. 483

    Castle Caldwell, ii. 487

    Castlecomer, ii. 465

    Castle Espie, ii. 486

    Castleford, i. 476, 485–489

    Castor, i. 28–37, 46, 49

    Caughley, i. 196, 227, 238, 262, 446; ii. 27, 110, 185

    Cauldon Place, ii. 318–324, 341

    Charlestown, ii. 190

    Chatham, i. 3, 8

    Chatsworth, i. 513

    Chatterley, ii. 304

    Cheadle, ii. 199

    Cheam, i. 167

    Chelsea, i. 101, 114, 162, 165, 168–198, 202, 213, 214, 221, 223,
        442, 443, 492, 512; ii. 61, 68, 70 _et seq._, 96, 97, 98, 106,
        107, 112, 113, 359, 505

    Chester, i. 93, 120, 213

    Chesterfield, i. 55, 59, 108, 520; ii. 115–125, 127, 165, 191

    Chester, Little, i. 56

    Chestersovers, i. 72

    Chesterton, i. 28

    Chipping Norton, i. 293

    Chiselhurst, i. 167

    Chiswick, i. 408; ii. 364

    Church Broughton, ii. 68

    Church Gresley, ii. 159, 160–166

    Cirencester, i. 57, 60

    Clattershall, i. 260

    Cliff Bank, ii. 17, 233, 262

    Cliff Vale, ii. 374

    Coalbrookdale, i. 274 _et seq._, 299–302

    Coal Island, ii. 485

    Coalmoor, i. 317

    Coalport, i. 227, 232, 238, 262–290, 448; ii. 97, 101, 105, 111,
        138, 438, 447, 449, 506

    Coalville, i. 422, 423

    Coatbridge, ii. 516, 517

    Cobridge, ii. 167, 247, 290–297, 306

    Coburnbrook, i. 261

    Cock-pit Hill, ii. 56 _et seq._, 111

    Codnor Park, ii. 127, 128, 129

    Colchester, i. 35, 37, 42, 45, 46, 55, 57, 60, 62, 63

    Coleorton, ii. 166

    Coleraine, ii. 172

    Collingbourne Drucis, i. 88

    Collingham, ii. 455

    Cologne, i. 63, 89, 90, 92, 98, 99, 127

    Comber, ii. 486

    Conisborough, i. 510, 518

    Cossey, i. 455

    Coventry, i. 427

    Coxhoe, ii. 17

    Cradley, i. 260

    Craigleith, i. 163

    Crewshole, i. 406, 407

    Crick, ii. 133–135

    Criselly, ii. 369, 371

    Crockle, i. 44

    Cromford, ii. 142 _et seq._

    Crosby, ii. 19–21

    Cuerdale, ii. 473

    Cumberton, i. 265

    Cupet Green, ii. 128


    Daisy Bank, ii. 463 _et seq._

    Dale Abbey, ii. 144

    Dale Hall, ii. 261–270

    Danes Fort, ii. 467

    Darley Dale, i. 6, 7, 11, 139; ii. 369

    Darlington, ii. 191

    Dartmoor, ii. 522

    Darwen, i. 10, 14

    Debdale, ii. 136, 138

    Delph, The, i. 260

    Denaby, i. 526, 527

    Denby, ii. 125, 128–132, 133, 135, 165

    Dennell, i. 12

    Denzell, i. 22

    Deptford, i. 165; ii. 10, 11

    Derby, i. 67, 78–80, 108, 114, 139–141, 161, 176–198, 202–214,
        215–218, 221, 223, 227, 228, 233, 264, 266, 273, 283, 295, 302,
        305, 390, 391, 396, 397, 407, 410, 441, 442, 452, 512, 524; ii.
        56–114, 136 _et seq._, 150, 155, 156, 159, 179, 226, 244, 331,
        359, 369, 422, 436, 447, 449, 495, 506, 519

    Derbyshire Pottery, i. 67 _et seq._, 78–80, 88, 108

    Derventio, i. 56

    Devenish, ii. 487

    Dimsdale, i. 99, 460

    Ditchling, ii. 456

    Divis Mountain, ii. 467

    Don, i. 455, 464, 476, 478, 503, 509, 519, 520–526, 527

    Donegal, ii. 486

    Dorking, i. 303

    Dorset, i. 50

    Dothill, i. 265

    Dowth, ii. 475

    Drakelow, ii. 155, 160, 163

    Dresden, ii. 167, 342

    Droitwich, ii. 150, 449

    Drumgay, ii. 471

    Drumnakilly, ii. 467, 470

    Dublin, i. 165; ii. 478–483, 487, 488

    Dudley, i. 260; ii. 422

    Duffield, i. 78–80, 415; ii. 114

    Duffryn, ii. 447

    Dulwich, i. 435

    Dumbarton, ii. 506, 519

    Dunamase, ii. 470

    Dunbar, ii. 503, 504

    Dungannon, ii. 485

    Dunkirk, i. 486

    Dunstable, i. 293

    Dunwood, ii. 346

    Durham, ii. 1, 141

    Durobrivian, i. 28–37, 43, 51


    East Langton, ii. 503, 504

    East Moor, ii. 117

    Easton, i. 407

    Easton Pierse, i. 123

    Eastwood, ii. 334–337, 341, 401, 402

    Ebbisham, i. 454

    Eccles, i. 76

    Eckington, ii. 125

    Edgbaston, ii. 419

    Edinburgh, i. 311; ii. 502, 514, 519, 520

    Edingley, ii. 140

    Edmonton, i. 201

    Eglw-y-Sillan, ii. 101, 451

    Elk Low, i. 17

    Ellenborough, ii. 106

    Eller Field, i. 101

    Ellesmere, ii. 50

    Elmley, i. 265

    Ely, i. 22, 339

    Enniskillen, ii. 471, 472, 487

    Epperstone, i. 419

    Epsom, i. 93

    Epsom Wells, i. 93

    Etruria, i. 115; ii. 14, 45, 167, 187, 245, 247, 326, 327, 344,
        345–390, 489

    Etwall, ii. 111

    Euston Road, i. 219

    Ewell, i. 166, 167

    Exeter, i. 343, 345; ii. 457


    Falmouth, i. 320

    Farringdon Street, ii. 150

    Fenagh, ii. 466

    Fenton, ii. 87, 167, 229, 232, 315, 407–422

    Ferguslie, ii. 517

    Fermanagh, ii. 475–498

    Ferrybridge, i. 485, 489–494, 517, 518

    Fimber, i. 14, 18, 19

    Finchley, i. 353

    Florence Court, ii. 485

    Foley, The, ii. 401, 421

    Ford, ii. 10

    Foremark, ii. 143

    Fowey, i. 13

    Fremington, i. 347, 348

    Frog Hall, ii. 139

    Frome, i. 258

    Fulham, i. 93, 98, 99, 114, 118–132, 169, 221, 421


    Gallatown, ii. 520

    Garnkirk, ii. 507 _et seq._, 516

    Garrison Island, ii. 487

    Gartcosh, ii. 508

    Gateshead, ii. 1–17

    Germo, i. 322, 324

    Gervans, i. 12

    Gestingthorpe, i. 458

    Glasgow, i. 137; ii. 2, 178, 505–516, 523

    Glenboig, ii. 516

    Glen Dorgal, i. 12

    Gloucester, ii. 436

    Godalming, i. 302

    Golden Hill, ii. 423–432

    Gospel Hillock, i. 15

    Gravel Lane, i. 161

    Great Hucklow, i. 105

    Great Malvern, ii. 148

    Greendock, ii. 232, 303

    Greenfield, ii. 325 _et seq._

    Green Lane, i. 94

    Green Low, i. 15

    Greenock, i. 165; ii. 485, 518

    Greenwich, i. 139, 162–165, 454

    Gresley, ii. 155, 156, 159, 160–166

    Grindlow, i. 16

    Gunton, i. 440 _et seq._, 453, 456

    Gunville, ii. 372


    Hackney, i. 237

    Hagley, i. 260

    Halifax, ii. 455

    Ham, i. 112, 198, 199

    Hampton Court, i. 408, 435

    Hanley, i. 96, 339; ii. 12, 40, 51, 97, 109, 167, 187, 273, 288,
        298–344, 401, 412

    Harracles, ii. 346

    Harrogate, i. 485

    Hartfield, ii. 372

    Hartington, ii. 139

    Hartshorne, ii. 160–166

    Hawcaster-rigg, i. 528

    Hayes, i. 266

    Haygreen, i. 260

    Hay Top, i. 19

    Headington, i. 46 _et seq._, 51, 52, 59, 61, 459; ii. 458

    Heathfield, ii. 508, 509, 516

    Hebrides, The, ii. 522, 523

    Hendra, ii. 187

    Herculaneum, ii. 44–50

    Hereford, ii. 452

    Heworth, ii. 7

    Hitter Hill, i. 17

    Holden Lane, i. 94; ii. 297

    Holkham, i. 458, 459

    Hollowaysend, i. 261

    Holly Bush, ii. 172

    Holmes, i. 519, 520

    Honiton, i. 343

    Hopton, ii. 143

    Horsehay, i. 263, 317

    Horsley Heath, i. 97; ii. 456

    Horspath, i. 120, 459

    Hot, or Holt, Lane, ii. 302, 303

    Hounslow, i. 161, 166

    Housam, ii. 455

    Hucklow, i. 105

    Hucknall Torkard, i. 417

    Huddersfield, i. 461

    Hull, i. 463–466

    Hungary Hill, i. 260

    Hylton (_see_ “North and South Hylton”)


    Ibstock, i. 422

    I-Columb-Kill, ii. 483

    Ilkeston, ii. 135, 136

    Indiho, i. 344, 345

    Ingleborough, ii. 522

    Ipswich, i. 162, 454

    Ironbridge, i. 263

    Island Thorn, i. 46

    Isleworth, i. 161, 162, 166

    Islington, i. 302, 445; ii. 39, 42


    Jackfield, i. 263, 274, 282, 304–317; ii. 97, 108, 110

    Jarrow, ii. 7


    Kempsey, i. 265

    Kensington, i. 504

    Kentish Town, i. 201, 214–218; ii. 68

    Kentmore, i. 514

    Kew, i. 408, 504

    Keymer, ii. 456

    Kilmory, ii. 199

    Kilnhurst, i. 496, 504, 527

    Kimmeridge coal, i. 50

    Kingsbridge, i. 318

    King’s Newton, i. 68, 69, 74; ii. 154, 155

    Kingsteignton, i. 343

    Kingston, i. 67, 74

    Kingswinford, i. 260

    Kinson, i. 413, 414

    Kintore, ii. 500

    Kirkcaldy, ii. 520

    Kirkley, ii. 26

    Knockmore, ii. 475

    Knottingley, i. 489–495


    Laganville, ii. 484

    Lambeth, i. 101, 133–153, 169, 425; ii. 54, 74

    Landore, ii. 444

    Langham, i. 202

    Langley Mills, ii. 135

    Langthwaite, i. 514

    Langton, ii. 503, 504

    Lane Delph, ii. 412–422 (_see_ “Fenton”)

    Lane End, ii. 139, 186, 232, 302

    Lanlawren, i. 13

    Larne, ii. 485

    Launceston Heath, i. 8

    Layerthorpe, i. 463

    Leathley, i. 474, 484, 485

    Leckpatrick, ii. 464

    Leeds, i. 293, 460, 467–512, 520, 522, 523, 527; ii. 47, 252

    Leicester, i. 38, 39, 58, 60, 106; ii. 159, 456

    Leppington, ii. 455

    Lesmardie, ii. 502, 503

    Lewes, i. 85, 86

    Lichfield, i. 296; ii. 369, 432, 434

    Lightmoor, i. 301

    Lincoln, i. 87; ii. 455, 457

    Linton, ii. 155

    Lisbellaw, ii. 475

    Lisnevah, ii. 464

    Little Chester, i. 56; ii. 107, 109, 113, 150

    Little London, i. 528

    Liverpool, i. 70, 108, 165, 211, 230, 442, 487; ii. 18–55, 88, 186,
        199, 284, 339, 350, 355, 356, 413, 445, 446, 480, 483, 514

    Llandoger, i. 397

    Llanelly, ii. 431, 444, 445, 446

    Lochgilphead, ii. 199

    Londinières, i. 73

    London Potteries, i. 119–220; ii. 148–150

    Longport, ii. 167, 187, 268, 282, 283–287, 295, 427

    Longton, i. 462; ii. 57, 64, 66, 67, 167, 287, 340, 386–422

    Looe, i. 331

    Lough Eyes, ii. 474 _et seq._

    Lough Melvin, ii. 487

    Loughrey, ii. 465

    Lowesby, i. 421, 422

    Lowestoft, i. 439–454, 502

    Ludlow, i. 263

    Lugwardine, ii. 452

    Lye, i. 260, 261

    Lyme Regis, i. 139

    Lynn, ii. 105


    Mackrackens, ii. 464, 465

    Madeley, i. 263, 275, 302–304; ii. 105

    Maer, ii. 327

    Malvern, i. 224; ii. 148

    Manchester, i. 424; ii. 32

    Mansfield, i. 503; ii. 101, 104, 109

    Market Bosworth, i. 423

    Marlborough, i. 41

    Marsh Baldon, i. 120, 459

    Mayer Museum, i. 70

    Mayora, ii. 465

    Medway, i. 24–28

    Melbourne, ii. 136

    Melling, ii. 28, 45

    Memsie, ii. 502

    Mere, i. 86

    Merton, i. 157, 166

    Mexborough, i. 492, 510, 517–519, 520

    Middlesborough, ii. 16, 17

    Middleton, i. 467, 471

    Mill Wall, i. 160, 432

    Milscar, ii. 455

    Milton, ii. 297

    Mole Cop, i. 96–98

    Monkwearmouth, ii. 11

    Montblairy, ii. 501

    Montrose, ii. 502, 503

    Morewood Moor, ii. 134

    Morley, ii. 483

    Mortariæ, i. 56, 58

    Mortlake, i. 160

    Morvah Hill, i. 14

    Monsal Dale, i. 3, 15, 16, 19

    Much Wenlock (_see_ “Wenlock”)

    Mullion, i. 12

    Musselburgh, ii. 519

    Myton, i. 463


    Nantgarw, i. 283, 284, 288, 303; ii. 101, 105, 138, 437, 438, 441,
        447–452

    Netham Dam, i. 406

    Netherend, i. 260

    Newark, i. 209, 212

    Newbold, ii. 125

    Newbottle, ii. 1, 12

    New Canton (_see_ “Bow”)

    Newcastle-on-Tyne, i. 137; ii. 1–17

    Newcastle-under-Lyme, i. 97, 296; ii. 97, 232, 236, 247, 326, 327,
        432, 433

    New Forest, i. 42–46; ii. 454

    New Grange, ii. 463

    New Hall, i. 381; ii. 97, 112, 296, 302–310

    New Hill, i. 520, 527, 528

    New Moor, ii. 12

    Newport, ii. 359, 360

    Newstead Abbey, i. 513

    Newton Abbot, i. 348

    Newton, Potters, i. 46

    New Troy, ii. 105

    New Wortley, i. 503

    Nonsuch, i. 166

    Nottingham, i. 108, 355, 415–421, 458, 466, 495; ii. 109, 119, 455

    North Elmham, i. 72

    North Hylton, ii. 1, 3, 8 _et seq._

    North Shields, ii. 1, 5, 7

    North Shore, ii. 15

    Norton, i. 265; ii. 16

    Norton-in-the-Moors, ii. 193

    Norwich, i. 2, 67, 74, 90, 441, 445, 451, 455

    Nuneaton, i. 427

    Nuneham Courtenay, i. 120, 459

    Nuttall, i. 420


    Oldbury, i. 266

    Old Hall, ii. 305, 311–315

    Old Penrith, ii. 503, 504

    Oldswinford, i. 261, 296

    Omagh, ii. 467

    Orkneys, ii. 503, 522

    Osmotherley, i. 463

    Ouseburn, ii. 1, 3, 4, 5

    Oxford, i. 46, 67, 74, 83, 84, 120, 222, 265

    Oxford Street, i. 219

    Ozingell, i. 72


    Painted Roman Pottery, i. 50

    Paisley, ii. 517

    Panshard, i. 44

    Parkfield, ii. 374

    Patrick’s Hill, ii. 42

    Pedler’s Acre, i. 169, 177; ii. 74

    Pednandrea, i. 349

    Penicuik, ii. 504

    Penkhull, ii. 185, 424

    Penquite, i. 18

    Penrith, ii. 503, 504

    Penryn, i. 320, 321

    Pensnett, ii. 422

    Pettigo, ii. 487

    Pickering, i. 23

    Pinxton, ii. 101, 102, 104, 109, 111, 136–142, 144, 447

    Pitt’s Enclosure, i. 46

    Place, i. 13, 460–462

    Plaistow, ii. 134

    Plymouth, i. 114, 115, 224, 318–338, 345, 357 _et seq._, 397, 442,
        477; ii. 35 _et seq._, 302 _et seq._, 495

    Polesworth, i. 423

    Pontefract, i. 489–494

    Poole, i. 123, 411–413

    Port Dundas, ii. 513

    Port Hill, ii. 302, 304, 306

    Portobello, ii. 519, 520

    Pot-house Hillocks, ii. 134

    Pot Ovens, i. 528

    Potters Newton, i. 46, 466

    Powick, i. 222

    Prescott, ii. 33, 54

    Prestonpans, ii. 521


    Railshead Creek, i. 161

    Ramsgate, ii. 95

    Rathbo, ii. 502

    Rawmarsh, i. 519, 527

    Reading, ii. 455

    Redcliff Backs, i. 352 _et seq._

    Redruth, i. 320, 349

    Red Street, ii. 304

    Renishaw, ii. 123

    Repton, ii. 144–150

    Rhymney, ii. 451

    Ridge House, ii. 355

    Ripley, ii. 455

    Ripon, ii. 455

    Rockingham, i. 219, 220, 445, 460, 462, 495–520; ii. 439

    Rode Heath, ii. 248, 279

    Rolleston, ii. 372

    Rollox, ii. 515

    Ronaldshay, ii. 503, 504

    Rosendale, i. 134

    Rotherham, i. 464, 497, 502, 519–527; ii. 114

    Rotterdam, i. 134; ii. 455

    Roundway Hill, i. 14

    Rowley Regis, i. 145

    Royd’s Hall, i. 461

    Runcorn, i. 151; ii. 46, 47, 53, 187

    Rutherglen, ii. 519

    Rydall, ii. 413

    Rye, i. 457


    St. Ann’s, i. 406

    St. Anthony’s, ii. 5

    St. Columb, i. 323

    St. Germo, i. 322, 324

    St. Helen’s, i. 145; ii. 54

    St. Mary-Church, i. 338

    St. Peter’s, ii. 5

    St. Rollox, ii. 515

    St. Stephen’s, i. 323

    Salisbury, i. 85, 86

    Salopian, i. 42 _et seq._

    Saltram, ii. 139

    Sandringham, i. 435

    Sandyford, ii. 428

    Scarborough, i. 85, 86, 265; ii. 153

    Scropton, ii. 356

    Sculcoates, i. 463–466

    Seabridge, ii. 369, 372

    Seacombe, ii. 54

    Seaham, ii. 12

    Selby, i. 472, 489

    Selzen, i. 63

    Severn Valley, i. 43

    Sheal Loch, ii. 502, 503

    Sheerness, i. 24–28

    Sheffield, i. 506, 524; ii. 159, 359, 402, 413

    Shelton, i. 95, 101, 303, 355, 433, 463, 464, 505; ii. 97, 112,
        167, 195, 203, 298–344, 422

    Shipley, ii. 129, 132, 133

    Shirlott, i. 296

    Shortroods, ii. 517

    Shotover, i. 120, 459

    Shrewsbury, i. 263, 305; ii. 67, 185, 369, 372

    Sibson, i. 41

    Silverdale, ii. 282

    Sinclairtown, ii. 520

    Skipwith, ii. 455

    Sloden, i. 44

    Smallwood, ii. 351

    Smethwick, i. 145; ii. 454

    Sneyd Green, ii. 297

    South Hylton, ii. 1, 10

    South Normanton, ii. 112

    South Shields, ii. 7

    Southwark, i. 161, 293; ii. 63

    Southwark Bridge Road, i. 432

    Southwell, ii. 140

    Southwick, ii. 1, 10, 11, 12

    Spondon, ii. 112

    Stafford, i. 111; ii. 241

    Stamford, i. 160, 261, 423, 431–438

    Stanley, i. 94

    Stapleton, i. 397

    Stepney, i. 162, 466; ii. 1, 3, 4

    Stilton, i. 518

    Stockton-on-Tees, i. 2, 8; ii. 12–19

    Stoke, i. 84, 427

    Stoke-upon-Trent, i. 86, 304; ii. 108, 110, 167–235, 273, 284, 299,
        303, 315, 327, 349, 369, 371, 374, 414, 420

    Stone, i. 8

    Stornoway, ii. 522

    Stourbridge, i. 128, 260–262; ii. 368

    Stowmarket, i. 454

    Stratford, i. 214; ii. 505

    Stratford-le-Bow (_see_ “Bow”)

    Stratford-on-Avon, ii. 305

    Studley, ii. 419

    Sunderland, ii. 1, 5, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13

    Suthrick, ii. 63

    Sutton, ii. 53

    Sutton Hall, i. 196

    Swadlincote, ii. 156–159

    Swansea, i. 137, 282, 338, 504, 509; ii. 101, 105, 138, 435–451

    Swarkestone, ii. 106

    Swinton, i. 219, 220, 445, 455, 464, 469, 482, 487, 495–520, 524,
        527; ii. 439

    Sydnope, ii. 369


    Tadcaster, i. 470

    Taffs Vale, ii. 451

    Tamworth, i. 303, 424

    Teignmouth, ii. 515

    Thorns, The, i. 260

    Thorpe-Arch, i. 470

    Tickenhall, i. 88; ii. 151–153, 239

    Tinkersclough, ii. 342

    Tipton, i. 97; ii. 456

    Tiverton, i. 407

    Tolthorpe, ii. 455

    Tong, i. 263; ii. 139

    Torksey, ii. 104, 138

    Torquay, i. 342, 343; ii. 452–454

    Tottenham Court Road, ii. 108

    Tours, i. 130

    Tredenny, i. 9

    Tregonnin, i. 324

    Treloar, ii. 187

    Trentham, i. 4, 17, 19, 303; ii. 367, 388

    Tresvenneck, i. 4

    Trevello, i. 13

    Trillick Barr, ii. 463

    Truro, i. 397

    Trusley, ii. 136

    Tuack, ii. 499, 500

    Tullow, ii. 466

    Tunstall, ii. 167, 246, 272, 282, 289, 302, 305, 423–432

    Tunstead, ii. 283

    Turnham Green, ii. 364

    Tutbury, i. 95


    Upchurch, i. 24–28, 30, 32, 51

    Uriconium, i. 42, 44, 263, 264, 296

    Uttoxeter, i. 95, 96


    Vauxhall, i. 156, 157, 160, 169, 202, 295; ii. 68, 129

    Vemnoll, i. 123

    Verreville, ii. 506, 515


    Wadshelf, ii. 118

    Wakefield, i. 259, 528; ii. 163, 455

    Walesby, i. 59, 61

    Walton, ii. 45, 121

    Wandsworth, i. 157, 166

    Wanstead, ii. 139

    Warrington, i. 42, 50–53, 261; ii. 50–53

    Watcombe, i. 339–343

    Wath-upon-Dearne, i. 527, 528

    Wednesbury, i. 97; ii. 422, 456

    Weggewood, ii. 345

    Welbeck Abbey, ii. 85

    Wenlock, i. 263, 265, 296, 307

    Wentworth, i. 498 _et seq._, 507, 512, 521

    Westbury, i. 407

    West Ham, i. 112, 198, 199

    West Kennett, i. 9

    Westminster, i. 91, 120

    Weston-super-Mare, i. 408–411

    Wetherby, i. 470

    Wheatbridge, ii. 121

    Wheatcroft, ii. 134

    Whitcar, ii. 455

    Whitehaven, i. 411

    Whitmore, ii. 111, 327

    Whittington, i. 519; ii. 122–125

    Whitwick, i. 422

    Wilderspool, i. 42, 50, 53

    Willingsworth, ii. 422

    Wilmcote, i. 260

    Wilnecote, i. 424–426

    Wimbledon, i. 157

    Winchester, i. 295; ii. 256

    Windsor, i. 139, 209, 408, 435; ii. 109

    Wingeworth, ii. 139

    Winster, ii. 60

    Winterton, i. 53

    Winwick, ii. 53

    Wirksworth, ii. 104, 142–144, 159

    Wisbech, i. 438

    Wittington, ii. 452

    Wolstanton, ii. 238, 267, 345

    Wolverhampton, i. 426

    Wolviston, ii. 17

    Wooden Box, ii. 156, 160–166

    Woodville, ii. 156, 160–166

    Woolwich, i. 128

    Wootton-under-Edge, i. 397

    Worcester, i. 41, 114, 135, 137, 161, 211, 216, 217, 219, 221–262,
        264, 270 _et seq._, 307, 442, 446, 452, 490, 492; ii. 27, 63,
        89, 90, 92, 101, 104, 105, 108, 111, 112, 114, 138, 141, 436,
        438, 441, 442, 488

    Wortley, i. 460, 466, 484, 485, 503

    Wrenthorpe, i. 528

    Wrotham, i. 454

    Wroxeter (_see_ “Uriconium”).

    Wykeham Moor, i. 21


    Yarmouth, i. 139, 439, 441, 452, 455

    Yellow Jack’s Cairn, ii. 467

    Ynisymudw, ii. 446, 447

    York, i. 44, 46, 61, 63, 115, 460–462, 489, 522; ii. 142

    Youghal, ii, 485

    Youlgreave, i. 104

    Yr Eifel, ii. 522




                      INDEX OF NAMES OF PERSONS.


    Abbey, ii. 44–50

    Abel, ii. 533

    Abington, ii. 302

    Abraham, i. 286; ii. 178, 181

    Absolon, i. 455

    Ackroyd, i. 469, 472

    Adams, i. 94; ii. 187, 224, 233, 235, 236, 237, 247, 293, 297, 310,
        325, 326, 329, 336, 338, 386, 387, 388, 389, 390, 407, 420,
        423, 424, 425, 426, 528

    Adcock, ii. 158, 533

    Adderley, ii. 98, 155, 405

    Addington, i. 191

    Addison, ii. 3, 329

    Ador, ii. 527

    Agnew, ii. 485

    Ailesford, i. 216

    Ainsworth, ii. 16

    Alcock, i. 526; ii. 237, 268, 273, 275, 278, 280, 283, 296, 297

    Aldersea, ii. 232

    Aldred, i. 440, 441, 446, 452

    Alexander, ii. 538

    Algar, i. 338

    Allcroft, i. 258

    Allen, i. 317, 338, 339, 444, 445, 452, 502; ii. 237, 242, 297,
        365, 371, 372, 381, 398

    Allerton, ii. 390

    Allies, i. 400

    Allman, ii. 271, 527

    Alsebrook, i. 510

    Alsing, ii. 536

    Alsop, i. 265, 338, 354, 397, 402

    Alvery, ii. 140

    Amatt, i. 396, 407

    Amery, ii. 416

    Amhurst, i. 224

    Ancaster, i. 216

    Anderson, ii. 392, 521, 522

    Andrew, ii. 224

    Ansell, i. 74, 75, 186; ii. 160

    Anstice, i. 275, 282

    Anton, ii. 21

    Arde, i. 134

    Argyle, i. 210

    Arkwright, ii. 61, 94, 142, 143

    Armstrong, ii. 8, 488, 497, 532

    Arnold, i. 91, 92; ii. 524

    Arnoux, ii. 193, 194

    Artis, i. 28, 29, 30, 35

    Arundel, ii. 190

    Asbury, ii. 397

    Ash, i. 416; ii. 102, 106, 140, 341, 420

    Ashmore, ii. 484

    Ashton, ii. 532

    Ashwell, ii. 409

    Ashwin, ii. 305

    Ashworth, ii. 316, 317, 318, 332

    Askew, i. 186 _et seq._; ii. 93, 98, 99, 101, 111

    Asquith, i. 486

    Astbury, i. 101, 110, 111, 196; ii. 172, 237, 298, 299, 342, 347,
        348, 397, 412, 413, 415, 416, 419

    Astles, ii. 442

    Aston, i. 167, 286, 315

    Atkins, ii. 102

    Atkinson, ii. 3, 142

    Atterbury, ii. 532, 533

    Aubrey, i. 123; ii. 84

    Austin, ii. 8, 11, 12, 415, 416

    Averills, ii. 416

    Ayers, ii. 526

    Ayliffe, i. 91, 92; ii. 524

    Aynsley, ii. 307, 392


    Bacchus, ii. 412, 420

    Backer, i. 135

    Bacon, i. 139, 153; ii. 93, 134, 135, 535

    Baddeley, i. 137; ii. 299, 310, 316, 320, 332, 401, 402, 422, 527

    Baggaley, ii. 237, 253, 279, 280, 404, 536

    Bagley, ii. 416

    Bagnall, ii. 190, 236, 302, 304, 305, 307, 311, 413, 415, 416

    Bagshawe, i. 103, 465, 513; ii. 431, 525

    Bagster, ii. 301, 320

    Baguley, i. 503, 506, 507

    Bailey, i. 124, 126, 129, 130, 131, 132, 213, 260, 515

    Bainbrigge, ii. 124

    Baker, i. 167, 258–260, 408, 420, 433, 534

    Bakewell, i. 197; ii. 62, 359

    Baldwin, i. 455

    Bale, i. 412; ii. 527

    Ball, i. 411–413, 452; ii. 10, 11, 102, 236, 237, 344

    Ballard, i. 303

    Baller, i. 388

    Bamford, ii. 331

    Bancroft, ii. 94, 106, 193

    Bandinell, i. 193

    Banford, i. 397; ii. 99, 103, 106

    Bank, ii. 297

    Banks, i. 139, 190, 337; ii. 105, 139, 160, 168, 232, 343, 418,
        420, 438, 536

    Barbier, ii. 528

    Barclay, ii. 526

    Barker, i. 513, 519, 520, 525, 526; ii. 106, 237, 280, 281, 289,
        400, 415, 416, 419

    Barlow, ii. 311, 389, 390, 416

    Barnes, ii. 24, 25, 26, 399

    Barness, i. 353

    Barns, i. 416, 417

    Barnwell, ii. 530

    Barr, i. 229, 237, 238, 240, 242, 307; ii. 104, 105, 111, 438, 442

    Barrett, i. 197; ii. 359

    Barrow, ii. 536

    Barrs, i. 135

    Barry, i. 437; ii. 161, 165

    Barsham, ii. 528

    Bartlett, i. 44, 46, 72; ii. 537

    Bartolozzi, ii. 94

    Barton, i. 178, 179, 180 _et seq._; ii. 71, 72, 102, 106

    Barwick, i. 469, 472

    Basford, ii. 270, 526, 529

    Bass, ii. 156

    Batchelor, ii. 534, 537, 538

    Bate, ii. 535

    Bateman, i. 3, 23, 102, 106; ii. 241

    Bates, ii. 262, 263, 264, 265, 266, 267, 295, 406

    Bathurst, i. 316

    Bathwell, ii. 271

    Batkin, ii. 402, 421, 422

    Baugh, ii. 532

    Baxter, i. 210; ii. 441, 442

    Baylis, i. 129

    Baynes, i. 116, 135, 473; ii. 252, 525

    Beadle, i. 135

    Bearcraft, i. 135

    Beard, ii. 32, 48

    Beardmore, ii. 279, 399, 404

    Beattie, ii. 265, 378

    Beauchamp, i. 224

    Beauclerc, ii. 486

    Beck, ii. 344

    Becket, i. 216

    Beckitt, i. 260

    Beddoes, ii. 442

    Bedford, i. 528

    Beech, ii. 236, 237, 245, 247, 248, 272, 281, 347, 400, 423, 428,
        429

    Beeley, ii. 438, 447

    Beevers, i. 517

    Begnon, i. 397

    Belfield, ii. 111, 521

    Bell, i. 110, 203, 435, 464, 466; ii. 35, 237, 393, 416, 508, 512,
        524

    Bellamy, i. 135; ii. 392

    Bellarmine, i. 92

    Bellay, ii. 528

    Bellense, ii. 194

    Bellford, ii. 528, 529

    Beltzung, ii. 527

    Bemrose, ii. 152

    Benbow, i. 267

    Benn, i. 484

    Bennet, i. 132; ii. 280, 295

    Benson, i. 107, 109, 110; ii. 524

    Bentinck, i. 344, 420

    Bentley, i. 175, 197, 307; ii. 31, 244, 300, 301, 355–385

    Berks, ii. 198

    Bernard, ii. 527

    Bernardeau, i. 210

    Berry, i. 320; ii. 530

    Berlin, ii. 535

    Besche, ii. 178, 181

    Beswick, i. 210; ii. 429, 527

    Betew, i. 188, 201, 202

    Bethell, ii. 14

    Betteridge, ii. 162

    Bettington, i. 399

    Bettison, ii. 534

    Betts, ii. 457, 526

    Bevans, i. 319, 321–338; ii. 444, 532

    Bevington, ii. 331, 342, 439, 441

    Bewick, i. 512; ii. 6

    Bewley, ii. 530, 535

    Bibby, ii. 28

    Biddell, ii. 527

    Bigland, ii. 529

    Bill, ii. 423

    Biller, ii. 334

    Billin, i. 107, 109; ii. 524

    Billingsley, i. 283–290; ii. 93, 101, 102–105, 109, 438, 442, 443,
        447, 448, 449, 450

    Billington, ii. 224

    Billups, ii. 286, 536

    Bingley, i. 496 _et seq._, 500

    Binney, i. 527

    Binnie, ii. 508

    Binns, i. 199, 200, 211, 229, 234, 236, 242–259; ii. 104, 136–140,
        144, 238, 441, 537

    Birbeck, i. 286, 536

    Birch, ii. 311, 334, 431

    Bird, ii. 7, 233, 235, 262, 534

    Birkbeck, ii. 531

    Birks, ii. 397, 399

    Bishop, ii. 302, 328–331

    Blace, i. 266

    Blackburn, ii. 529

    Blackhurst, ii. 281, 402, 430

    Blackmore, i. 225; ii. 535

    Blackner, i. 417

    Blackwell, ii. 293

    Blake, i. 201, 203; ii. 116, 118, 529, 537

    Blakeway, i. 275–290, 305

    Blakey, ii. 4

    Blanchard, i. 139, 153–155; ii. 530

    Bland, ii. 533

    Blashfield, i. 139, 160, 432–438; ii. 202, 528, 530

    Blayney, i. 224, 225

    Blenkinsop, i. 471

    Blomeley, i. 197; ii. 359

    Blood, ii. 102, 103, 106, 125, 399

    Bloor, ii. 86, 87, 88, 91, 106, 114

    Blount, i. 224

    Blower, ii. 416

    Blowers, ii. 415, 416

    Blunt, i. 96

    Bly, i. 449, 452

    Boardman, ii. 355

    Boarman, i. 180 _et seq._; ii. 71, 72, 102, 103, 106, 107

    Boden, i. 273; ii. 423

    Bodley, ii. 278, 279

    Bodmer, ii. 360

    Boetius, ii. 530

    Bold, ii. 240, 533

    Bolton, i. 216, 239, 240; ii. 50, 51, 278

    Bone, i. 331, 397; ii. 308

    Bonner, ii. 536

    Bonneville, ii. 532, 534, 535, 537

    Booker, ii. 199

    Boon, ii. 414

    Boote, ii. 254, 256, 257, 282, 526, 529, 532

    Booth, i. 189, 524; ii. 233, 234, 235, 237, 283, 288, 303, 304,
        307, 308, 328, 339, 340, 343, 398, 402, 416, 420, 423, 427,
        428, 429, 526

    Boreman, ii. 71, 72, 102, 103, 106, 107

    Borlase, i. 15; ii. 533

    Borrows, ii. 423

    Borton, ii. 102

    Bosher, ii. 97

    Boswell, ii. 62

    Botham, ii. 416

    Bothwell, ii. 437

    Bott, i. 243, 251

    Boulenger, ii. 532

    Boulton, ii. 260, 530, 532, 533, 536, 537, 538

    Bourne, ii. 125, 126, 128, 129, 130, 132, 133, 135, 159, 163, 193,
        243, 247, 259, 272, 279, 283, 284, 297, 341, 347, 410, 420,
        423, 525, 526

    Bourry, ii. 529

    Bousfield, ii. 529

    Bouvert, ii. 529

    Bowcock, i. 209, 210, 212, 313

    Bowden, ii. 535

    Bowdler, i. 286

    Bowen, i. 260, 253

    Bowers, ii. 288, 429, 529

    Bowley, ii. 423

    Bowman, ii. 93, 107

    Boyer, i. 179, 180 _et seq._; ii. 71, 72, 74

    Boyle, ii. 87, 190, 202, 209, 224, 233, 235, 374, 408

    Bradbury, ii. 107

    Bradley, i. 224, 225, 227, 237, 259, 297

    Bradshawe, ii. 404

    Brameld, i. 445, 496, 497, 500 _et seq._, 527; ii. 401

    Bramler, i. 485

    Brammall, ii. 401

    Brammer, ii. 512

    Brandling, i. 471

    Bratt, ii. 288

    Bray, ii. 62

    Brayley, ii. 124

    Brearey, i. 497

    Breeden, ii. 529

    Breeze, ii. 237, 423, 527

    Brentnall, i. 515; ii. 107

    Breton, i. 320

    Brett, ii. 527

    Brewer, i. 303; ii. 93, 107

    Brianchon, ii. 529

    Briand, i. 397

    Brice, i. 357

    Briddon, ii. 116, 121, 122

    Bridgett, ii. 406

    Bridgwood, i. 462, 390, 404; ii. 246, 398, 406, 409, 411, 420, 427,
        439, 444

    Briggs, ii. 152

    Brillait, i. 390

    Brimmer, i. 420

    Brindley, ii. 187, 283, 353, 528

    Briscoe, i. 417, 418, 420

    Britain, i. 360, 386, 396

    Britten, ii. 528

    Britton, i. 473, 480; ii. 124

    Broad, ii. 346

    Brock, i. 339; ii. 536, 537

    Brocklesby, ii. 103, 108

    Brodbent, i. 427

    Broderick, i. 12

    Bromley, i. 519; ii. 122, 123, 124, 218, 221, 336, 338, 528

    Brood, ii. 279

    Brooks, ii. 159, 309, 429, 525

    Brooman, ii. 530, 531, 532, 533, 534

    Brough, ii. 402, 527, 534

    Brougham, ii. 120

    Broughton, i. 524; ii. 108, 271, 428

    Brown, i. 209, 264, 266, 275, 297, 307, 440–443, 451; ii. 103, 311,
        374, 410, 517, 518, 526, 527, 532, 536, 537

    Brownfield, ii. 290, 291, 293, 297

    Brownley, ii. 518

    Brown-Westhead, ii. 319, 320, 321

    Brummitt, ii. 423

    Brunt, ii. 162

    Brunton, ii. 11

    Brutus, i. 222

    Bryan, i. 397

    Bryant, i. 338

    Buchan, i. 60; ii. 364, 366, 520

    Buckingham, i. 174, 175, 178

    Buckle, i. 444

    Buckley, ii. 280, 341

    Bucknall, ii. 236, 290, 297

    Bull, ii. 536

    Buller, i. 216, 345, 346; ii. 526, 530

    Bullock, i. 517; ii. 108, 407

    Bullough, i. 503

    Burdett, ii. 50, 126, 143

    Burdon, ii. 9

    Burgess, i. 310; ii. 275, 282, 283

    Burke, i. 381, 382, 383

    Burleigh, ii. 529

    Burn, ii. 3, 237

    Burnell, i. 338

    Burnett, i. 209

    Burnsall, ii. 70

    Burrough, ii. 65, 416, 536

    Burslem, ii. 346

    Burton, i. 431; ii. 60, 127, 128, 155, 178, 311

    Bush, i. 188; ii. 528

    Busk, ii. 525

    Butler, i. 352, 495; ii. 102, 103, 110

    Butter, ii. 62

    Butts, ii. 58

    Byerley, ii. 187, 369, 372, 373

    Byers, ii. 1, 12

    Byford, i. 486


    Cadle, ii. 360

    Cadogan, i. 219, 498

    Cagin, i. 130, 131

    Caldwell, ii. 193, 243, 244, 535

    Calland, ii. 444

    Callender, i. 383

    Callowhill, i. 247

    Calvert, i. 353; ii. 135

    Cambridge, i. 514

    Camelford, i. 323, 335, 360

    Cameron, ii. 507, 538

    Camm, ii. 454

    Campbell, i. v; ii. 186, 192–218, 228–232, 522, 527, 531, 538

    Canning, i. 424

    Cannon, i. 215

    Capperman, ii. 13

    Carey, i. 357, 409, 411

    Carr, i. 151; ii. 157, 533, 537

    Cartage, i. 216

    Carter, i. 135, 355 _et seq._; ii. 224, 297

    Cartland, ii. 533

    Cartledge, i. 115; ii. 236, 237, 297, 342, 525

    Cartwright, ii. 158, 236, 252, 397

    Case, ii. 49, 54

    Cash, ii. 162, 166

    Cashin, ii. 534

    Caskon, ii. 115, 116

    Castle, i. 390

    Cave, i. 227; ii. 436

    Cavendish, i. 210

    Cecil, i. 295

    Cederwaller, ii. 534

    Chablin, ii. 528

    Chadwicke, ii. 280, 535

    Chaffers, i. 123, 124, 448, 449, 463, 483; ii. 22, 33–37, 42

    Challinor, ii. 271, 272, 409, 423, 424, 428

    Chamberlain, i. 238–259, 268; ii. 105, 202, 442, 530, 532

    Chambers, ii. 444

    Champion, i. 158, 323, 331, 335, 336, 356 _et seq._; ii. 302, 304,
        305, 306, 364, 449, 519

    Chapman, ii. 399, 535

    Chappell, i. 473, 485

    Chapuis, ii. 530

    Charlton, ii. 4, 5

    Chatterley, ii. 297

    Chawner, ii. 68

    Chenot, ii. 528

    Chesterfield, i. 192

    Chesworth, ii. 399

    Chetham, ii. 392

    Chetwand, ii. 296

    Chilcott, i. 400

    Child, i. 216; ii. 424

    Chilton, i. 135

    Chisholm, ii. 372

    Christian, ii. 41

    Christie, i. 186; ii. 74, 75

    Chrystal, ii. 530

    Chubb, ii. 525

    Cimey, ii. 531

    Clais, ii. 108

    Clamond, ii. 537

    Clare, i. 361; ii. 280, 528

    Clarence, i. 251

    Clarke, i. 135, 167, 276, 280, 297, 420, 520; ii. 60, 87, 102, 103,
        108, 246, 289, 295, 328, 427, 428, 525, 530, 531, 532, 533,
        536, 537, 538

    Clarkson, i. 216

    Claus, ii. 535

    Clauss, ii. 532

    Clayton, i. 416, 417; ii. 525

    Cleak, i. 268

    Cleavey, ii. 108

    Cleghorn, ii. 335

    Clements, i. 129

    Clementson, ii. 311, 332

    Cleve, i. 302

    Clews, ii. 290

    Cliff, i. 151, 152; ii. 53, 529, 531, 533, 536, 537

    Clifton, i. 460, 489; ii. 347

    Clive, i. 212, 333; ii. 424, 429

    Clokie, i. 486, 488

    Close, i. 116; ii. 328, 525

    Clowes, i. 401, 466; ii. 237, 284, 302, 304, 305, 306, 389

    Coades, i. 118, 138–141, 153; ii. 97

    Coates, ii. 484

    Cobb, ii. 297

    Cobden, i. 401; ii. 223

    Cobley, ii. 530

    Cochet, i. 73

    Cochran, ii. 505, 506, 507, 515, 532

    Cockayne, i. 446

    Cockson, ii. 296, 307, 506, 507

    Codd, ii. 537

    Coffee, i. 139; ii. 93, 94, 97, 98

    Cogan, ii. 529

    Colclough, i. 416, 417; ii. 239, 297, 311, 398, 409, 442

    Cole, ii. 442

    Coleman, i. 210

    Coles, i. 189; ii. 435, 436

    Colfs, ii. 536

    Collier, ii. 455

    Collingwood, ii. 392

    Collins, ii. 203, 526

    Collinson, i. 514

    Colquhoun, ii. 506

    Colville, ii. 7

    Condliffe, ii. 237

    Conway, i. 140

    Conyers, i. 39, 40

    Cook, i. 224, 225, 286, 331, 337, 463; ii. 5, 334, 365, 538

    Cooksey, i. 135

    Cookworthy, i. 107, 114, 318–338, 354 _et seq._; ii. 35, 36, 302,
        304, 306, 364, 524

    Cooper, i. 156, 197, 216, 361; ii. 102, 103, 108, 159, 359, 390,
        394, 397, 400, 401, 405, 525, 526, 528

    Cope, ii. 390, 398, 404, 415, 416

    Copeland, i. 284, 492; ii. 88, 106, 161, 168–184, 235, 237

    Copestake, ii. 398, 409

    Coppock, i. 416, 417

    Corbett, i. 260

    Cordon, i. 515; ii. 530

    Cork, ii. 237, 259

    Cormie, ii. 258, 283

    Corn, ii. 281

    Cornelius, ii. 527

    Cornfoot, ii. 7

    Cory, ii. 441

    Cotterell, ii. 160, 532

    Cottingham, ii. 199

    Cotton, ii. 109, 535

    Coulter, i. 527

    Courteney, ii. 93

    Cowap, ii. 14

    Cowdery, ii. 536

    Cowen, i. 515; ii. 520, 521

    Cowley, i. 167

    Cowling, i. 209

    Cox, i. 174, 175, 176, 189

    Coxon, ii. 3, 297

    Craft, i. 200, 201, 208, 215

    Craig, ii. 531

    Crapper, ii. 334, 335

    Craven, i. 259, 305, 307; ii. 532

    Crease, i. 107, 115; ii. 525

    Cremorne, i. 490

    Cresswell, i. 225, 503; ii. 109

    Crewe, i. 88, 298; ii. 151, 152, 153, 371

    Crighton, ii. 537

    Cripps, i. 353

    Crispe, i. 118, 153, 157–160, 220, 444

    Crocker, i. 346, 347

    Croggan, i. 139

    Croker, i. 291, 293, 295

    Crompton, ii. 58, 62

    Crosse, ii. 457

    Crowther, i. 200 _et seq._

    Cruger, i. 361

    Cullen, i. 39, 90, 91, 133; ii. 524

    Cumberland, i. 254, 462, 504

    Cumming, ii. 520, 521

    Cuncliffe, ii. 30, 43

    Cupit, ii. 415, 416

    Curtis, i. 445

    Cutten, ii. 525

    Cuttler, i. 135

    Cutts, ii. 139

    Cyples, ii. 389, 390


    Da Costa, ii. 526

    Dale, i. 458, 504; ii. 396, 525

    Dalman, ii. 528

    Dalton, ii. 3, 305

    Dance, i. 222, 417

    D’Angely, ii. 527

    Daniel, i. 222, 287; ii. 187, 233, 235, 236, 237, 253, 254, 259,
        271, 273, 297, 299, 305, 306, 309, 310, 346, 349, 527

    Darbey, i. 297

    Darwin, ii. 369, 372

    Dauchell, ii. 529

    Daught, i. 124

    D’Avenant, ii. 169

    Davenport, i. 284; ii. 162, 224, 253, 259, 282, 283–286, 289, 344,
        528, 529

    Davies, ii. 140, 525

    Davis, i. 224, 225, 227, 254, 259, 353, 480, 508; ii. 7, 336, 451,
        532

    Davison, ii. 416

    Davy, ii. 373, 535

    Daw, i. 397

    Dawson, i. 484, 485; ii. 10, 12, 399, 526

    Deakin, ii. 393

    Dean, ii. 532, 536

    Deare, ii. 42, 93, 109

    De Boeuff, ii. 94

    Decon, i. 297

    Decuber, ii. 97

    De la Beche, i. 309

    De la Cour, i. 213

    De la Mayne, i. 116; ii. 478–482, 525

    De la Perrelle, ii. 537

    Dennett, ii. 118

    Dennison, ii. 537

    Dent, i. 221, 225, 258; ii. 401

    Derby, ii. 56, 142, 337

    Derbyshire, ii. 401, 529

    Derham, ii. 536

    Desaussure, i. 394

    Desbrow, ii. 156

    Dethick, ii. 405

    Devonshire, ii. 84, 178

    Dexter, ii. 109

    D’Hancarville, i. 435

    D’Huart, ii. 527

    D’Humy, ii. 537

    Dibb, i. 527

    Dickens, ii. 223

    Dicker, i. 320

    Dickinson, i. 520; ii. 40, 102, 103

    Dicks, ii. 282

    Diggory, ii. 275, 278

    Dillon, ii. 297

    Dillwyn, i. 504; ii. 104, 105, 436, 437, 438, 439, 440, 441, 442,
        443, 444, 447

    Dimer, i. 140

    Dimmock, ii. 310, 311, 334

    Disraeli, ii. 223

    Divett, i. 343, 346

    Dixon, ii. 8, 11, 12, 109

    Docksey, ii. 525

    Dodd, ii. 103, 134

    Dodson, ii. 109

    Doe, i. 136, 137, 138, 400; ii. 103, 299, 442

    Doley, ii. 529

    Dolleans, ii. 529

    Don, i. 455

    Donald, ii. 518

    Doncaster, ii. 185

    Donkin, ii. 6

    Donovan, ii. 436, 437, 482

    Doody, ii. 434

    Dooley, ii. 163

    Dopter, ii. 529

    Dorn, ii. 530

    Doulton, i. 144–150; ii. 54, 528, 530, 532

    Dowling, ii. 530

    Downshire, i. 224

    Doxey, i. 417

    Dresser, ii. 232

    Drinkwater, ii. 33

    Drury, ii. 404

    Dry, i. 297

    Dryden, ii. 5

    Dubois-Maisonneuve, i. 435

    Ducôte, ii. 525, 526

    Dudley, i. 192

    Dudson, ii. 311, 336

    Duesbury, i. 176, 180 _et seq._, 215, 216, 217, 232–259, 266, 407,
        441; ii. 57, 61–132, 136, 137, 156, 422

    Dugdale, ii. 142

    Duke, ii. 273, 275, 278

    Dulake, ii. 534

    Dunderdale, i. 485 _et seq._

    Dunnachie, ii. 534

    Dunnil, i. 305, 307

    Dunning, ii. 430

    Durand, ii. 531, 536

    Durham, ii. 174, 179

    Dutton, ii. 414, 416

    Duvivier, ii. 93, 97, 308

    Dwight, i. 76, 98, 99, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 126, 127,
        128, 129, 132, 169, 318; ii. 124

    Dyas, i. 272


    Eardley, ii. 288, 429

    Earnshaw, i. 520

    Eastlake, i. 331

    Eberton, ii. 430

    Eckingham, i. 224

    Ecroyd, ii. 536

    Eden, i. 361

    Edge, ii. 236, 237, 259, 260, 261, 279, 413, 416

    Edinburgh, ii. 321

    Edkins, i. 351, 352, 353, 356, 377, 383, 387, 388, 390, 394, 395,
        403, 404

    Edwards, i. 197, 213; ii. 68, 86, 109, 156, 159, 160, 237, 254,
        267, 268, 269, 272, 282, 299, 359, 390, 397, 399, 411, 412,
        420, 526, 530, 532, 536, 538

    Egan, i. 407; ii. 68

    Egerton, ii. 347

    Eginton, ii. 148

    Elers, i. 76, 99, 100, 101; ii. 298, 299, 302, 342

    Eley, i. 515

    Elin, ii. 109

    Elkin, ii. 411

    Elkington, ii. 194, 381

    Elliot, ii. 262

    Ellis, i. 344; ii. 51, 311, 527, 531

    Ellnor, i. 416, 417

    Elsmore, ii. 430

    Elton, i. 388

    Embrey, ii. 525

    Emery, ii. 289, 295, 529, 532

    Emmens, ii. 535

    Engelbrecht, i. 213

    Engledene, ii. 536

    Englefield, i. 435

    English, i. 463

    Ensell, ii. 533

    Ensor, ii. 163, 164, 534, 535

    Erichson, ii. 536

    Evans, i. 297, 403; ii. 135, 194, 342, 429, 440, 441, 442

    Evelyn, i. 461

    Everal, ii. 415, 416

    Evers, i. 467

    Evett, i. 225, 226

    Evrard, ii. 528

    Exeter, ii. 142


    Faulkener, i. 175

    Faussett, i. 72

    Fahy, i. 209

    Fairburn, ii. 534

    Fairholt, i. 293

    Falconer, ii. 3

    Farley, i. 343, 398

    Farnsworth, ii. 102, 109

    Faucheux d’Humy, ii. 537

    Fazackerley, ii. 23

    Fell, ii. 2, 5, 6, 8, 10

    Fennell, i. 173

    Fenton, i. 470; ii. 305, 310

    Ferguson, ii. 508, 516, 517, 534

    Ferneyhough, ii. 407

    Ferns, i. 479

    Ferrars, i. 76, 79; ii. 160

    Ferte, ii. 530

    Ferz, i. 188

    Févre, ii. 527

    Fifield, i. 397, 401

    Fillis, i. 338

    Findler, ii. 526

    Finney, ii. 398

    Fisher, i. 260

    Fishley, i. 347, 348

    Fison, i. 454

    Fitzwilliam, i. 219, 499, 501, 503, 507, 512, 514, 515, 516, 521

    Flamsteed, ii. 128

    Flaxman, i. 139; ii. 265, 364, 369, 378

    Fleming, i. 258; ii. 515, 532

    Fletcher, ii. 50, 288, 416, 422, 533

    Fleury, ii. 533

    Flight, i. 216, 217, 236–259, 307; ii. 104, 105, 438, 442

    Flower, i. 355, 356

    Fodhla, ii. 461

    Fogg, i. 209, 210; ii. 102, 103

    Foley, ii. 179

    Follows, ii. 535

    Fondeville, ii. 535

    Fontainemoreau, ii. 526

    Ford, i. 173, 517; ii. 273, 275, 280, 333, 341, 428, 526, 531, 537

    Fordes, ii. 524

    Fordy, ii. 7

    Fordyce, ii. 84

    Forester, i. 268; ii. 235, 396, 406, 531, 536

    Forneday, ii. 115

    Foster, i. 489

    Fould, i. 285

    Fourdrinier, ii. 526

    Fournier, ii. 65

    Fowke, i. 421, 422

    Fowler, i. 135

    Fox, i. 320; ii, 416

    Frank, i. 332, 352 _et seq._

    Franklin, i. 390

    Franks, i. 172, 173, 461

    Freeman, ii. 397, 398, 413

    Freik, i. 212

    Frevet, ii. 536

    Fricker, i. 407

    Frost, ii. 109, 536

    Fry, i. 333, 353, 357, 380, 383, 386, 387, 388, 394, 528

    Frye, i. 107, 112, 113, 168, 198, 199, 208, 209, 213; ii. 524

    Fulham, i. 107

    Furly, i. 134

    Furnival, ii. 293, 294, 295, 311, 328, 529

    Fussel, i. 356

    Fynney, ii. 346


    Gadsby, ii. 109

    Gagerly, ii. 31

    Gallimore, i. 264, 265, 266, 267; ii. 226, 227, 404

    Galloway, ii. 3

    Gally, ii. 535

    Gamble, i. 451

    Gardissal, ii. 529

    Gardner, ii. 414, 416, 418, 419, 488, 521, 522, 528

    Garland, i. 397

    Garner, ii. 299, 413, 418, 419

    Garnier, i. 191

    Garrett, ii. 530

    Garrick, i. 201; ii. 31, 169–184

    Gaskell, ii. 278, 279, 537

    Gatellier, ii. 53

    Gater, ii. 297

    Gaurion, i. 186; ii. 72

    Geddes, ii. 506

    Gedge, ii. 532, 534, 537

    Geoghegan, ii. 465, 530

    Gerard, ii. 407

    Gernon, ii. 528

    Gibbs, i. 307, 424; ii. 232, 526

    Gibson, i. 485; ii. 178, 339, 340

    Gilbee, ii. 528

    Gilbody, ii. 29

    Giles, i. 214–218

    Gill, i. 486; ii. 142, 143

    Gillard, ii. 256

    Gillespie, ii. 507, 535

    Gillingwater, i. 440, 441, 443, 452

    Gillow, ii. 452, 453

    Ginders, ii. 408

    Girard, ii. 529

    Girdler, ii. 532

    Gisborne, ii. 532

    Gladman, i. 159

    Gladstone, ii. 223, 337

    Glass, ii. 310, 311

    Glasson, ii. 440

    Glover, i. 304, 416, 417, 528; ii. 94, 243, 407

    Goddard, i. 136; ii. 536

    Godwin, ii. 237, 238, 283, 295, 297, 407, 452

    Goldie, i. 307, 310

    Goldney, i. 356, 401

    Good, ii. 78

    Goode, ii. 395

    Goodfellow, ii. 271, 423, 424, 427, 526

    Gooding, i. 220

    Goodwin, ii. 54, 55, 128, 396, 530

    Gore, ii. 47, 479

    Goreham, ii. 535

    Gorman, ii. 534

    Gosling, i. 220; ii. 141

    Gosnell, ii. 527

    Goss, i. viii; ii. 224, 225, 226, 227, 228, 326, 334, 335, 338,
        522, 535

    Gottgetreu, ii. 529

    Gough, ii. 159

    Goulding, i. 161, 162, 166

    Gover, i. 375

    Grace, ii. 53

    Grafton, ii. 528

    Graham, ii. 44–50, 526

    Grainge, ii. 524

    Granger, i. 240, 254–259, 268; ii. 159, 532

    Grant ii. 112

    Graves, ii. 460, 465, 532

    Gray, i. 261, 303; ii. 4, 118, 309, 520

    Greatbach, ii. 185, 392, 413, 416, 420

    Greaves, i. 520

    Green, i. 151, 197, 211, 230, 232, 235, 467 _et seq._, 486, 497
        _et seq._, 520–527; ii. 26 _et seq._, 50, 88, 102, 159, 245,
        279, 350, 359, 392, 393, 407, 408, 409, 413, 417, 527, 529,
        533, 534, 537

    Greening, ii. 529

    Greenland, i. 295

    Greenwell, i. 21

    Greenwood, i. 138, 139; ii. 420, 525

    Gregg, ii. 484

    Gregson, i. 463

    Gresley, ii. 98, 155, 163

    Gretton, i. 431

    Grey, ii. 118, 126, 447

    Grice, ii. 158, 159

    Griffin, i. 209

    Griffiths, i. 136, 138, 144

    Grimsley, ii. 527

    Grispie, ii. 265

    Grose, ii. 224

    Grosvenor, ii. 515, 516, 534

    Grove, ii. 407

    Guelton, ii. 537

    Guerin, ii. 537

    Guest, i. 275–277, 431; ii. 444, 445, 538

    Gunton, i. 456

    Gurnell, i. 320

    Gwyn, i. 390

    Gyles, i. 201


    Hackney, ii. 297, 528

    Hackwood, ii. 307, 310, 311

    Hadfield, ii. 139, 140

    Hadley, i. 247

    Haggett, ii. 536

    Hague, ii. 525

    Hailstone, i. 470, 478, 479, 481

    Halde, i. 321

    Hall, i. viii, 260, 465; ii. 109, 110, 162, 227, 238, 281, 283,
        307, 423, 428, 429, 442

    Hallam, i. 510; ii. 165, 166, 399, 416

    Hallins, ii. 416

    Halse, ii. 174

    Hamilton, i. 435; ii. 224, 233, 357, 394, 395, 440, 520, 525, 530,
        531

    Hamme, i. 98, 133, 318

    Hammersley, ii. 272, 288, 311, 386, 397, 429, 430

    Hampson, ii. 401

    Hampton, ii. 334

    Hancock, i. 135, 225, 231, 232 _et seq._, 272, 273; ii. 87, 88, 90,
        92, 93, 109, 110, 185, 193, 224, 272, 421, 423, 429, 488

    Hand, ii. 110

    Handley, i. 416, 417, 427; ii. 282, 311, 334

    Hankey, i. 209

    Hanley, ii. 412

    Hannah, ii. 528

    Hansen, ii. 537

    Hanson, i. 135, 469, 472, 500

    Hanway, i. 162

    Harcourt, ii. 527

    Hardenburg, ii. 110

    Hardensydes, i. 361

    Harding, ii. 281, 296, 307, 527

    Hardinge, ii. 154

    Hardy, i. 472

    Harewood, i. 520

    Harford, i. 357, 394

    Hargreaves, i. 305, 307

    Harland, ii. 529, 536

    Harley, ii. 412

    Harmer, ii. 529

    Harper, i. 133, 134, 160, 297

    Harpur, ii. 60

    Harracles, ii. 346

    Harris, i. 218, 361

    Harrison, i. 260, 261, 486; ii. 21, 159, 166, 232, 236, 290, 344,
        349, 412, 413, 417, 423, 433, 534, 536

    Harrop, ii. 342

    Hart, i. 297, 407

    Hartenberg, ii. 93

    Hartley, i. 467 _et seq._, 486 _et seq._, 522

    Hartshorne, i. 286, 297, 407

    Harvey, ii. 392

    Harvig, ii. 526

    Harwood, ii. 8, 16

    Haslem, ii. 110

    Haslewood, i. 268

    Hassall, ii. 218, 221, 297

    Hassall, i. 355; ii. 407

    Hassalls, i. 355; ii. 186, 297

    Hastings, ii. 162, 365

    Haward, i. 446

    Hawkins, i. 291, 420

    Hawksyard, ii. 169

    Hawley, i. 519, 527; ii. 237, 392, 410

    Hawthorne, ii. 270

    Hayden, i. 397

    Haynes, i. 260; ii. 435, 436, 443

    Hayward, i. 320

    Haywood, ii. 31, 288

    Hazley, i. 416

    Head, ii. 3

    Heald, i. 518

    Healey, ii. 527

    Heapey, ii. 127

    Heath, i. 215, 232–259; ii. 57, 58, 59, 60, 62, 63, 64, 66, 67,
        69, 89, 237, 238, 251, 281, 283, 297, 300, 304, 412, 413, 420,
        423, 424, 432

    Heathcote, ii. 115, 116, 405, 421

    Heilmann, ii. 536

    Hellyer, i. 338

    Hempel, i. 116, 198; ii. 525

    Hendley, ii. 112

    Heuer, ii. 537

    Henley, ii. 535

    Hennique, ii. 528

    Henry, i. 224, 232, 530, 531, 532

    Henson, ii. 110

    Herapath, i. 414

    Hermann, ii. 535

    Heron, ii. 520

    Herschell, ii. 364, 366

    Herwain, ii. 444

    Hess, ii. 530

    Hesse, ii. 537

    Hewitt, ii. 119

    Heylyn, i. 107, 112, 168, 198, 208, 209, 210; ii. 524

    Heyne, ii. 536

    Hickey, ii. 110

    Hickling, ii. 525

    Hickman, i. 260

    Hicks, ii. 185, 258, 299, 310, 315, 316, 320, 335, 533

    Higgins, i. 203

    Higginson, ii. 533

    Hilditch, ii. 396, 420

    Hill, i. 396; ii. 62, 93, 103, 110, 223, 235, 275, 297, 537

    Hillsborough, ii. 484, 485

    Hinde, ii. 341, 530

    Hingman, i. 486

    Hingston, i. 320, 321

    Hipwood, i. 463

    Hirstwood, i. 461, 462

    Hitchen, ii. 247

    Hoare, i. 3

    Hobson, i. 507, 513, 514; ii. 282

    Hodge, ii. 527, 533, 534

    Hodgkinson, ii. 342

    Hodson, ii. 399, 537

    Hoffman, i. 259

    Hoffstaedt, ii. 194, 527

    Hogarth, i. 188, 353

    Hoggson, ii. 535

    Holdcroft, ii. 297, 403, 427, 532, 535

    Holdship, i. 224, 225, 230–259, 272; ii. 89, 92

    Holland, ii. 45, 110, 142, 237, 392, 393, 423, 444, 445, 446, 447,
        536

    Hollins, i. 433; ii. 187–218, 224, 229, 302, 303, 305, 306, 310,
        351, 528, 535

    Hollinshed, ii. 271, 341, 430

    Holmes, i. 466; ii. 102, 110, 530, 534

    Holt, i. 108, 134, 407; ii. 524

    Holyoake, ii. 537

    Hone, i. 201

    Honeychurch, i. 345

    Hood, ii. 430, 442

    Hope, i. 352, 402; ii. 58, 243, 297

    Hopkin, ii. 283

    Hopkins, i. 135, 353; ii. 237

    Hopkinson, i. 132; ii. 111

    Hopwood, ii. 396

    Hornblower, ii. 536

    Horncastle, i. 502

    Horne, ii. 325, 326

    Horrocks, ii. 97

    Horsley, ii. 102, 110

    Horton, i. 276, 277, 282

    Hoton, i. 275, 276, 277, 282, 533

    Hough, i. 416, 417

    Houghton, i. 123, 156, 220, 293, 454, 458, 461, 528; ii. 455

    Howard, i. 83, 84, 209; ii. 112, 369

    Howe, i. 419; ii. 84, 94

    Howson, ii. 334

    Hubbart, i. 158

    Hudden, ii. 399

    Hudson, ii. 394, 399, 401

    Hughes, i. 158, 173, 297; ii. 290, 297, 404, 534, 535

    Hullmandel, ii. 526

    Hulme, i. 503; ii. 258, 283, 392

    Hulse, ii. 395, 405

    Humble, i. 467; ii. 45

    Humy, ii. 537

    Hunt, i. 295; ii. 158, 202, 535, 536

    Hunter, i. 186; ii. 74, 78

    Huntsmann, ii. 532

    Hurll, ii. 516, 517

    Hurt, ii. 143

    Hürten, ii. 174, 181

    Hurter, ii. 95

    Hutchings, i. 197, 472; ii. 359

    Hutchinson, i. 467

    Hutton, ii. 62, 63, 66

    Huxham, i. 319

    Hyatt, ii. 536, 537


    Illingworth, ii. 528

    Ince, ii. 143

    Ingham, i. 492

    Inglefield, i. 179 _et seq._; ii. 71

    Inglett, i. 344

    Isaacs, ii. 281

    Ivimey, ii. 536


    Jablonowski, ii. 528

    Jackson, i. 161, 520; ii. 6, 237, 410, 416, 535, 536, 537

    Jacob, ii. 530

    Jäger, ii. 126, 129

    James, i. 136, 297, 327, 338, 351, 389, 390, 395, 397; ii. 50, 67,
        451

    Jamieson, ii. 521

    Jansen, i. 232

    Jardin, ii. 530

    Jarvis, i. 139, 520, 528

    Jasper, i. 90

    Jay, i. 177

    Jeannest, ii. 194

    Jenkinson, ii. 365, 366

    Jenks, ii. 71, 72

    Jennings, ii. 528

    Jenny, ii. 442

    Jensen, ii. 536

    Jerrad, ii. 407

    Jersey, i. 217, 218

    Jervis, i. 337

    Jessop, ii. 68, 127

    Jewel, i. 320

    Jewitt, i. 3, 234, 418, 490; ii. 122, 124, 326

    Jinks, i. 180 _et seq._; ii. 71, 72

    Jobson, ii. 530, 532

    John, i. 320

    Johnson, i. 133, 134, 160, 175, 176, 276, 278, 322, 419, 420, 444,
        463, 464, 465; ii. 21, 39, 62, 110, 124, 185, 310, 311, 315,
        316, 320, 328, 335, 365, 399, 401, 412, 420, 456, 485, 527,
        528, 531, 532, 533, 534, 535

    Johnstone, ii. 536

    Joiner, i. 423

    Jones, i. 107, 109, 218, 297, 312, 347, 397, 433, 465; ii. 160,
        202, 218, 224, 237, 247, 295, 297, 311, 401, 524, 525

    Jonson, i. 93, 295; ii. 456

    Joseph, ii. 531

    Jowett, ii. 530

    Joynson, ii. 245

    Jubb, i. 472

    Jug, i. 93

    Juleff, i. 349


    Kaskon, ii. 115

    Kay, ii. 102

    Kean, ii. 85, 86, 91, 94

    Keat, i. 291

    Keeling, i. 116; ii. 280, 281, 302, 303, 304, 305, 310, 311, 328,
        338, 394, 415, 416, 422, 427, 525

    Keene, i. 139; ii. 102, 110

    Kelsall, i. 492

    Kemp, ii. 252

    Kendall, i. 433; ii. 6, 134

    Kendrick, i. 51, 52, 53; ii. 52, 53

    Kennedy, ii. 257, 258, 516

    Kent, i. 216, 217, 218; ii. 156, 190, 412, 416

    Kentish, i. 209

    Kerr, i. 242, 251; ii. 526, 533, 538

    Key, i. 417; ii. 103, 110

    Keys, ii. 93, 103

    Kidd, i. 419, 420

    Kidston, ii. 506

    Kinder, ii. 150

    King, i. 260; ii. 14, 98, 99

    Kirkham, ii. 228, 271, 430, 529

    Kirkland, ii. 111

    Kishire, i. 157

    Kite, ii. 2, 129, 528

    Kleven, ii. 534

    Kluh, ii. 536

    Knight, i. 133, 134, 157, 158–160; ii. 66, 398, 411, 416

    Knowles, ii. 116, 118, 119, 166

    Kramer, ii. 531


    Lace, ii. 48

    Lafarque, ii. 535

    Lafon, ii. 530

    Lake, i. 201; ii. 532

    Lakin, ii. 251, 252, 253, 329

    Lambert, ii. 395

    Lancaster, ii. 124, 125, 142

    Lander, ii. 529

    Lane, i. 291

    Langford, ii. 534

    Langton, ii. 372

    Larkin, ii. 526

    Lascelles, i. 521

    Lauraguais, i. 107, 114; ii. 524

    Laurence, ii. 99, 102

    Laurent, ii. 535

    Lavie, i. 224

    Lawrence, i. 197; ii. 110, 111, 359

    Lawson, i. 135

    Lawton, i. 196; ii. 111, 416

    Layard, ii. 178

    Lea, i. 221; ii. 278

    Leach, i. 330

    Lead, ii. 111

    Leadbeater, ii. 221, 222, 223

    Leak, ii. 282, 402, 529, 531, 532, 533, 538

    Lear, ii. 333, 340

    Leason, ii. 198

    Leathes, ii. 483

    Lee, i. 254–260, 519; ii. 529, 536

    Leedham, ii. 159

    Leeds, i. 210

    Leicester, i. 458

    Leigh; ii. 275, 283, 297, 306, 307, 345, 347, 416, 533

    Leinster, i. 217, 218

    Legg, i. 210, 297

    Leon, ii. 528

    Leoni, ii. 530

    Lepetit, ii. 530

    Lesage, ii. 534

    Leslie, ii. 526

    Lesneur, ii. 530

    Le Souëf, ii. 531

    Lesser, ii. 529

    Lessore, ii. 381, 382, 383, 384, 385

    Levetzow, ii. 536

    Lewin, i. 127; ii. 7

    Lewis, i. 397, 433, 446; ii. 530

    Leyland, i. 420

    Licht, i. 259

    Liddle, ii. 262

    Lightfoot, ii. 395, 527

    Lilly, i. 240, 242; ii. 202

    Lincoln, ii. 224

    Lindemann, ii. 531

    Lindenschmidt, i. 72

    Lintzenich, ii. 533

    Lipscombe, ii. 122, 535

    Little, i. 352, 353

    Littler, ii. 245, 287, 288, 305, 422

    Littringhaus, ii. 535

    Liversedge, i. 503

    Livesley, ii. 328, 336

    Livingstone, ii. 178

    Llandig, i. 515

    Lloyd, i. 356, 397; ii. 390, 429

    Locker, ii. 87, 93, 237

    Lockerbie, ii. 527

    Lockett, i. 417, 419; ii. 236, 237, 253, 394, 530

    Lockie, i. 159

    Lodge, ii. 89

    Lomas, ii. 311

    Lombe, ii. 61

    London, i. 108; ii. 524

    Long, ii. 536

    Longdon, ii. 102, 103, 111

    Longman, i. 352, 353

    Looker, ii. 528, 529

    Lount, ii. 166

    Lovatt, ii. 233, 287

    Lovegrove, ii. 58, 102, 111

    Lowe, ii. 121, 129, 297, 399, 416, 442

    Lowenthal, ii. 530

    Lowndes, ii. 235, 423

    Lowton, ii. 94, 111

    Lubbock, i. 3

    Lucas, i. 139, 430; ii. 60, 111, 527

    Ludwig, i. 198

    Luis, ii. 529

    Lukis, i. 88

    Luson, i. 44

    Lutwyche, ii. 526

    Lygo, i. 140, 184, 185; ii. 73, 94, 95, 96, 98, 104, 114

    Lyne, i. 397

    Lysons, i. 161, 196

    Lyttle, ii. 534


    Maardt, ii. 536

    Macfarlane, ii. 177, 178, 179, 535

    Machin, ii. 237, 238, 253, 283, 334

    Macintyre, ii. 258, 531

    Macken, i. 403, 406

    Mackenzie, ii. 530, 531

    Maclachlan, ii. 111, 520

    Macmillan, ii. 499

    Macmurdo, i. 202

    Maddison, i. 277

    Maddock, ii. 237, 257, 268, 270, 271, 297, 526

    Madin, ii. 119, 124, 125

    Maiden, i. 216

    Maidment, ii. 301

    Majoribanks, i. 311; ii. 365, 367, 377

    Makintosh, i. 129; ii. 329

    Malampre, ii. 179

    Maling, ii. 1, 3, 4, 8

    Malkin, ii. 161, 236, 237, 239, 259, 269, 361, 410

    Mallit, ii. 526

    Malpass, i. 496; ii. 531, 537

    Mammatt, ii. 163

    Mann, ii. 528

    Manning, i. 475, 480, 509, 511, 524

    Mansfield, i. 215; ii. 45, 297

    March, ii. 535

    Mare, ii. 297, 310

    Margueritte, ii. 528, 529

    Mariotti, ii. 537

    Markland, ii. 531

    Marlborough, ii. 28

    Marryatt, i. 87, 397, 440, 454, 455; ii. 140, 457, 458

    Marsh, i. 273; ii. 236, 237, 238, 279, 280, 282, 283, 286, 287,
        288, 311, 347, 411, 412, 413, 415, 416

    Marshall, i. 202, 417, 431; ii. 520

    Marten, i. 413

    Martin, i. 131, 132, 320, 353; ii. 4, 398, 413, 535

    Martins, ii. 532

    Mason, i. 158, 445; ii. 102, 103, 111, 158, 159, 292, 315–318, 404,
        405, 407, 408, 413, 525

    Massellon, ii. 533

    Massey, ii. 160, 333, 340

    Massey, ii. 237

    Masterman, i. 486, 488

    Masters, ii. 526

    Matherson, ii. 522

    Matthews, i. 400, 408–441, 527; ii. 420, 421

    Matthewson, ii. 416

    Maw, i. 258, 263, 307–317; ii. 531, 533, 534, 536

    Mawdesley, ii. 423

    May, ii. 310, 311, 338

    Mayer, i. 442, 481; ii. 21, 24 _et seq._, 54, 56, 57, 233, 236,
        237, 262, 263, 266, 267, 279, 280, 301, 302, 310, 311, 319,
        333, 339, 340, 349, 420, 422, 423, 428, 528

    Mayfield, i. 466

    McAdam, ii. 515, 528, 531, 534

    McBirney, ii. 488, 497

    McClintock, ii. 178

    McDowall, i. 489

    McLachlan, ii. 111, 520

    McLauchlan, ii. 518

    McNally, i. 212

    McNay, ii. 521

    Mead, i. 215

    Mead, i. 345

    Meakin, ii. 295, 296, 297, 310, 340, 395, 430, 531

    Mear, ii. 423

    Meavy, i. 135

    Mee, ii. 416

    Meer, ii. 56, 57

    Meerman, ii. 365, 366

    Meigh, ii. 185, 299, 310–317, 320, 335

    Meir, i. 108; ii. 288, 297, 412, 423, 430

    Melbourne, i. 217, 218

    Meli, ii. 222

    Mellor, ii. 111, 237, 239, 259, 297, 337

    Mendheim, ii. 536

    Menet, ii. 535

    Meredith, ii. 43

    Metcalfe, ii. 23

    Meteyard, i. 80

    Methven, ii. 520

    Meyer, ii. 530

    Michele, ii. 537

    Middlemore, ii. 419

    Middleton, ii. 304, 401

    Miers, ii. 56, 57, 436

    Miles, i. 95; ii. 298, 451

    Millengen, i. 435

    Miller, ii. 174, 508, 513, 516, 531, 537

    Mills, i. 441, 445; ii. 311, 422

    Milner, i. 265

    Milton, i. 462, 521; ii. 93

    Minland, ii. 486

    Minton, i. 220, 272, 303, 432, 433, 435; ii. 106, 108, 119, 114,
        185–218, 224, 229, 233, 235, 378, 381, 384, 396, 403, 525, 527,
        536, 538

    Mitchell, i. 111, 457; ii. 236, 237, 241, 242, 388, 534

    Mobberley, i. 260; ii. 536

    Moffat, ii. 535

    Monckton, ii. 535, 537

    Monier, ii. 529

    Montagu, i. 361

    Montfaucon, i. 435

    Monti, ii. 179

    Moorhouse, ii. 527

    Moore, i. 444; ii. 1, 11, 102, 111, 115, 140, 281, 318, 320, 321,
        347, 394, 395, 409, 451, 456, 533

    Morand, ii. 534, 536

    Moreau, ii. 526

    Morgan, i. 188, 194, 210; ii. 97, 271, 280, 446, 534, 535, 537

    Morledge, ii. 102, 111

    Morley, i. 416, 417, 445; ii. 316, 318, 405, 530

    Morrell, ii. 102, 140

    Morris, i. 303, 304, 437; ii. 3, 442

    Morrison, ii. 522

    Morson, ii. 4

    Mort, ii. 48, 49, 54

    Mortlock, i. 219, 220, 499, 508, 515; ii. 385, 448

    Moser, i. 291

    Moses, i. 435

    Mosley, ii. 62, 245, 372

    Moss, ii. 27

    Mottershed, i. 452

    Mount Edgcumbe, i. 333

    Mourot, ii. 529

    Mudge, i. 319, 322; ii. 473

    Mufford, ii. 531

    Muir, ii. 518

    Muller, ii. 535

    Mullins, ii. 111

    Mundy, ii. 132, 133

    Munro, ii. 522

    Murphy, ii. 525

    Murray, i. 471; ii. 512, 519, 531, 535, 537

    Musgrove, ii. 102, 111

    Muss, i. 273, 277

    Myatt, i. 305, 421


    Nadin, ii. 155, 162, 166

    Napier, ii. 537

    Nash, i. 239; ii. 527

    Nasmyth, ii. 194, 527

    Neale, i. 481; ii. 300, 301, 342, 412

    Needham, ii. 2, 62, 129, 521, 527, 528

    Negretti, ii. 529

    Nel, i. 127

    Nelson, i. 139; ii. 531

    Nesbitt, i. 216

    Neville, i. 53; ii. 529

    Newbold, ii. 420, 422

    Newcastle, ii. 85

    Newsmarch, i. 60

    Newton, i. 520; ii. 526, 529, 530, 531, 532, 533, 534, 535

    Nicholson, i. 486, 488

    Nickels, ii. 525

    Nicklin, ii. 536

    Nightingale, i. 387, 388

    Nimms, ii. 533

    Nixon, ii. 405, 423

    Nollekins, i. 188, 190, 201, 202

    Nore, i. 220

    Norman, i. 395, 420, 444, 446, 449, 450, 455

    North, i. 484, 485

    Northampton, i. 4, 33, 202

    Northcote, i. 319, 331

    Northen, i. 153; ii. 529, 530

    Northumberland, ii. 84, 94

    Northwood, ii. 367

    Nourisson, ii. 528

    Nugent, i. 353

    Nuneham, i. 216


    Oade, i. 161

    Oakes, ii. 110, 280

    Oates, ii. 359

    Okell, ii. 42

    Okolowicz, ii. 538

    Oldfield, ii. 116, 119, 120, 121

    Oldham, ii. 341

    Oliver, i. 40, 224

    Omai, i. 337

    O’Neil, i. 182

    Onions, ii. 161, 237

    Opie, i. 331

    Orchard, i. 217

    Orde, ii. 199

    Orme, ii. 102

    Orr, ii. 533

    Orton, ii. 154

    Osborne, i. 135, 209

    Osgood, i. 127

    Oswald, ii. 531, 535

    Oulsnam, ii. 297

    Overley, i. 297

    Overton, i. 297

    Owen, i. 138, 335, 350, 354, 356, 357, 358, 379, 383, 388, 390,
        394, 396, 397; ii. 480


    Page, ii. 396

    Paget, i. 135; ii. 537

    Pain, ii. 238

    Palliser, i. 195; ii. 84, 92, 457

    Palm, ii. 527

    Palmer, i. 94; ii. 300, 301, 305, 412, 526

    Palmere, i. 286

    Palmerston, i. 216

    Pankhurst, ii. 338, 339

    Panzetta, i. 139

    Pardoe, ii. 441, 448, 449

    Pargeter, ii. 367

    Parker, i. 273, 334; ii. 4, 14, 28, 116, 288, 360, 525

    Parkes, i. 197; ii. 359

    Parkinson, ii. 531

    Parr, i. 196

    Parrish, i. 441, 449; ii. 102

    Parrot, i. 397; ii. 237, 297

    Parry, ii. 142, 530

    Parsons, i. 472; ii. 7

    Partridge, i. 297

    Pascall, i. 167; ii. 528, 529

    Passerio, i. 435

    Patience, i. 352 _et seq._

    Patterson, ii. 7, 485, 486, 536

    Patton, ii. 5, 7

    Payler, i. 397

    Payne, i. 177, 520; ii. 527

    Peacock, ii. 42

    Peake, ii. 160, 221

    Pearce, ii. 377

    Pearson, i. 260; ii. 124, 125, 295

    Peartree, i. 135

    Peel, ii. 202

    Pegg, i. 302; ii. 93, 111, 112, 122

    Peigner, ii. 535

    Peirce, i. 177

    Pellatt, ii. 293

    Pennington, ii. 31, 38–42, 112

    Pepper, i. 117; ii. 525

    Perrelle, ii. 537

    Perrens, i. 260

    Perrin, i. 221

    Perry, ii. 535, 536

    Pether, i. 156

    Petrie, ii. 529

    Phillips, i. 332, 348, 349, 408; ii. 8, 11, 12, 109, 112, 114, 116,
        127, 268, 281, 283, 298, 301, 311, 320, 377, 420, 536

    Pidding, ii. 527

    Piercey, ii. 533

    Piggot, i. 179 _et seq._; ii. 71

    Pilkington, ii. 62, 116, 125, 133, 151

    Pindar, i. 272, 337; ii. 243, 258, 259

    Pinkerton, ii. 484, 527

    Piranesi, i. 435

    Pitman, ii. 442

    Pitt, i. 322; ii. 84

    Place, i. 460, 461, 489

    Planché, ii. 57, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67

    Plant, ii. 398, 404, 421

    Platt, ii. 297, 531

    Plot, i. 76, 95, 96, 97, 98, 261, 458; ii. 432, 433, 434, 456

    Plowes, i. 485, 492

    Plowright, ii. 12

    Plymouth, i. 224; ii. 84

    Pochin, ii. 528

    Podmore, ii. 35, 37, 281, 423, 424, 429

    Pointon, ii. 237, 271

    Pole, ii. 30, 43

    Polwhele, i. 323

    Poole, ii. 218, 221, 246, 251, 252, 297, 329, 403, 427, 525, 527

    Pope, i. 383; ii. 297

    Popham, i. 492

    Port, ii. 41

    Porter, ii. 102, 112

    Portland, i. 210; ii. 365, 366

    Postill, ii. 533

    Potter, i. 451

    Potts, ii. 525

    Poulson, ii. 186, 187, 310

    Poulton, ii. 530

    Pountney, i. 400, 401

    Powell, i. 402, 403, 407; ii. 328, 329, 330, 331

    Powis, i. 217, 218

    Pownall, ii. 186, 187

    Pratt, i. 489; ii. 112, 300, 407, 410, 412, 527, 530, 533, 537

    Prentice, ii. 530

    Prestwich, i. 275–290

    Price, i. 291, 297, 402; ii. 150, 532

    Prideaux, i. 327; ii. 528

    Pridham, i. 332

    Prince, i. 500; ii. 112, 420, 531, 534

    Pritchard, i. 141, 277

    Pritchett, i. 224

    Prockter, i. 189, 407

    Procter, ii. 272, 393, 395, 396, 403, 407, 423

    Proeffel, i. 397

    Prosser, i. 312, 433; ii. 199, 202, 528, 529

    Protat, ii. 194

    Proudman, ii. 166

    Pugh, i. 289, 284; ii. 243

    Pugin, ii. 63, 199, 206, 232

    Pulham, i. 427, 428, 429, 431

    Pulleine, i. 488

    Purden, i. 421

    Putley, i. 295

    Pye-Smith, i. 165

    Pyne, ii. 527


    Quin, i. 291

    Quinton, i. 449; ii. 169


    Raby, i. 303, 401; ii. 342

    Radford, ii. 398, 420

    Raleigh, i. 291, 297, 298

    Ramsey, i. 91, 92; ii. 524, 537

    Randall, i. 217, 218, 220, 273, 286, 302, 303, 304; ii. 448

    Randle-Wilkinson, ii. 430

    Ransome, i. 162–165, 454

    Ranson, ii. 531

    Ratcliffe, ii. 307

    Rathbone, ii. 27, 48, 297, 423

    Rawlins, i. 390, 427

    Ray, ii. 536

    Read, i. 135, 405; ii. 161, 235

    Redgrave, i. 452

    Redhead, ii. 3

    Redrich, i. 109; ii. 524

    Reed, i. 492, 493, 510, 513, 514, 518; ii. 332, 442

    Reeks, i. 133, 309

    Rees, ii. 534

    Reeves, i. 417; ii. 408, 416

    Reid, ii. 37, 38, 527

    Rémond, ii. 527

    Rendle, ii. 533

    Repton, ii. 400, 401

    Reynolds, i. 103, 130, 331, 335, 377, 417, 454; ii. 94, 203, 206,
        441, 526

    Rhodes, i. 197, 442; ii. 124, 272, 359, 537

    Rice, ii. 536

    Rich, ii. 169, 242

    Richard, ii. 444

    Richards, ii. 407, 408

    Richardson, i. 298; ii. 527, 528, 530, 531

    Richmond, i. 528; ii. 142, 529

    Rickaby, ii. 11

    Ricketts, ii. 444

    Rickman, i. 440, 441

    Rickuss, ii. 330, 528

    Riddal, i. 133

    Riddle, ii. 395

    Ridgway, i. 411–413, 463, 464; ii. 299, 301, 310, 311, 316,
        318–324, 330, 332, 338, 339, 525, 526, 527

    Rigg, ii. 42, 43

    Riggs, ii. 432, 433

    Rigley, i. 212; ii. 101, 102

    Rigollet, i. 72

    Riley, ii. 258, 273, 280

    Ring, i. 137, 138, 354 _et seq._

    Rius, i. 90, 91

    Rivers, ii. 311

    Rivett, ii. 58

    Robbins, ii. 534, 536

    Roberts, i. 179, 182 _et seq._, 265, 297, 303, 489; ii. 71, 72,
        112, 359, 527, 530

    Robertson, i. 7, 94; ii. 122

    Robey, ii. 536

    Robi, ii. 439

    Robiglio, ii. 143

    Robins, i. 133, 134, 151, 160, 220, 302; ii. 102, 140, 448

    Robinson, i. 320; ii. 40, 92, 112, 134, 158, 166, 222, 223, 224,
        271, 273, 279, 290, 392, 399, 400, 401, 403, 532

    Robotham, ii. 531

    Robson, ii. 360

    Rochette, i. 435

    Rockingham, i. 219, 494, 498

    Rockley, ii. 112

    Rockliffe, ii. 538

    Roden, i. 297, 298

    Roebuck, ii. 520

    Rogers, ii. 4, 102, 103, 112, 267, 268, 451

    Rollason, ii. 530

    Roscoe, ii. 49

    Rose, i. 269, 274–290, 305, 448, 450, 452, 464; ii. 105, 112, 181,
        439, 449, 536

    Rosenberg, ii. 528

    Ross, i. 188, 232, 235

    Rossi, i. 139

    Rosson, ii. 35

    Roubilliac, i. 435

    Round, ii. 534

    Rous, i. 90, 91, 133; ii. 524

    Rouse, ii. 112

    Routledge, i. 139

    Rowbottom, ii. 133

    Rowland, ii. 140

    Rowley, ii. 158, 161, 238, 398, 527

    Ruelle, i. 198

    Rufford, i. 260

    Ruhl, ii. 168, 198

    Rupert, i. 472

    Rushworth, i. 139

    Russell, i. 193, 485; ii. 127, 530

    Rutland, i. 273

    Ruysbranch, i. 333


    Sacheverell, ii. 483

    Sadler, i. 211, 230; ii. 26 _et seq._, 43, 44, 45, 88, 279, 350

    Sale, ii. 416

    Saliby, i. 135

    Salt, ii. 340

    Salway, i. 224

    Sanby, ii. 94, 107

    Sandby, i. 187; ii. 50

    Sanders, i. 216; ii. 416, 527, 528

    Sandford, ii. 311, 525

    Sandys, i. 209, 222

    Sans, i. 76, 104; ii. 241

    Saqui, i. 331, 332, 397

    Sartine, ii. 112

    Saunders, i. 353, 397, 411–413

    Scarratt, ii. 532

    Schrieber, i. 200, 206, 211, 381, 390, 396

    Scots, i. 160

    Scott, ii. 1, 10, 12, 533, 534, 535

    Scrivener, ii. 341, 386, 407, 532

    Seago, i. 445, 446, 450

    Sealy, i. 139, 140, 141, 153

    Seaton, i. 489

    Seddon, ii. 232, 237, 296, 526

    Sedley, i. 420

    Sefton, i. 417; ii. 28

    Seithen, ii. 528, 530

    Selby, i. 417, 497

    Sewell, ii. 6

    Sha, i. 201

    Shackleton, i. 485

    Shakespear, i. 186

    Sharp, i. 486, 496; ii. 87, 93, 156, 157, 158, 528, 531

    Sharratt, ii. 125

    Shaw, i. 96, 100, 107, 110, 111, 196, 201, 266, 297; ii. 19
        _et seq._, 34, 105, 159, 233, 236, 237, 241, 242, 270, 280,
        296, 310, 346, 398, 399, 420, 421, 422, 423, 424, 426, 434,
        524, 535

    Sheen, ii. 112

    Sheffield, ii. 86

    Shelley, i. 492; ii. 407, 411

    Shepherd, i. 135

    Sheppard, i. 218

    Sheridan, i. 212, 216; ii. 390, 538

    Sherman, i. 188

    Sherrin, ii. 451

    Sherwood, i. 377

    Shillito, i. 503

    Shipley, ii. 102, 111

    Shirley, ii. 103, 397

    Shore, i. 161, 162, 166, 527

    Shorter, ii. 396

    Shorthose, ii. 431

    Shrewsbury, ii. 199

    Shrigley, ii. 251, 252, 518

    Shubotham, ii. 404

    Shuter, i. 197; ii. 359

    Siddons, ii. 365, 366

    Sidney, i. 493, 518

    Siemens, i. 151; ii, 529, 530, 533, 537

    Silbermann, ii. 528

    Silk, i. 273

    Simcock, i. 197; ii. 359

    Simes, ii. 103, 112

    Simpson, i. 76, 89, 90, 168, 196, 304, 452, 517; ii. 51, 52, 112,
        125, 193, 236, 237, 297, 311, 342, 416, 420, 526

    Sims, i. 163–165, 454

    Singer, i. 156; ii. 525

    Skardon, i. 334

    Skelson, ii. 398, 404

    Skelton, ii. 536

    Sketchley, i. 378; ii. 529, 530

    Skey, i. 425, 426

    Skidmore, i. 116; ii. 525

    Skinner, ii. 2, 13, 14, 526

    Slater, ii. 112, 388

    Smeaton, i. 337

    Smith, i. 24, 28, 29, 39, 62, 72, 87, 135, 188, 265, 266, 268, 269,
        275, 297, 382, 383, 388, 389, 420, 422, 452, 456, 457, 463, 464,
        488, 489; ii. 13, 14, 15, 97, 102, 103, 112, 113, 142, 163,
        278, 282, 297, 339, 403, 411, 483, 526, 527, 532, 535, 536, 537

    Sneyd, ii. 311

    Snowball, ii. 11

    Snowdon, i. 181 _et seq._, 381; ii. 12, 72

    Soar, ii. 102, 103, 113

    Solander, i. 337

    Solon, ii. 207

    Son, ii. 102

    Sonman, i. 134

    Soqui, i. 331

    Southall, ii. 113

    Southorn, i. 297–299

    Southwell, i. 209

    Sowter, i. 519

    Spackman, i. 114; ii. 524

    Sparks, ii. 332

    Speight, i. 503, 515, 524

    Spence, ii. 524, 529, 530, 534

    Spencer, ii. 33, 54, 85, 526, 535

    Spengler, ii. 93, 94, 95, 96

    Spershot, ii. 525

    Spiller, ii. 530

    Spinney, ii. 525

    Spittle, ii. 528

    Spode, ii. 109, 167–184, 185, 232, 233, 235, 299, 396, 410, 413,
        414, 416

    Spooner, ii. 90, 102, 110

    Spremont, i. 168, 170, 173–198; ii. 70, 107

    Sprott, ii. 507

    Stables, ii. 102, 103, 113

    Stafford, i. 456

    Stairs, i. 210

    Staley, ii. 158, 159

    Stamford, ii. 244, 359

    Stamp, i. 464

    Standing, i. 413

    Stanesby, ii. 113

    Stanhope, ii. 58

    Stanley, i. 427; ii. 395

    Stanway, ii. 218, 221, 222, 246, 325, 326, 327, 427

    Stark, ii. 407

    Statham, ii. 29

    St. Berry, i. 135

    Steel, ii. 93, 113, 193, 236, 237, 270, 333, 349

    Steen, ii. 416

    Steer, i. 344; ii. 30, 73

    Steigewald, ii. 527

    Stenny, ii. 488

    Stenson, ii. 106

    Stephan, i. 305; ii. 93, 97

    Stephens, i. 175, 176, 216, 358, 397; ii. 113, 297

    Stephenson, i. 209, 216, 452, 471; ii. 6, 87, 341, 484

    Stevens, i. 353; ii. 436

    Stevenson, ii. 93, 236, 290, 297, 431, 518

    Stewart, i. 463

    Stiff, i. 141–144

    Stirrup, ii. 393

    St. John, i. 258, 307

    Stocker, ii. 526, 535, 536

    Stokes, ii. 470

    Stone, i. 160, 113; ii. 297

    Stove, i. 330

    Stow, i. 90, 296

    Street, i. 310; ii. 505

    Stringer, ii. 186, 198, 345

    Stringfellow, ii. 479, 480

    Strong, ii. 62

    Struthers, ii. 531

    Strutt, ii. 61, 94

    Stubbs, i. 215, 218; ii. 261, 341, 343, 404

    Sully, i. 415, 416

    Sumner, ii. 224

    Sundell, ii. 305

    Sussex, i. 504, 514

    Sutherland, i. 514; ii. 199, 367, 388, 405

    Sutton, ii. 237, 281, 307, 416

    Swallow, i. 166

    Swan, ii. 388

    Sweatman, ii. 534

    Swedenborg, i. 337

    Swift, ii. 251

    Swinton, i. 455

    Sydney, i. 167


    Tabor, i. 217

    Talor, i. 103; ii. 241

    Tams, ii. 392, 399

    Tamworth, ii. 160

    Tatham, i. 435

    Tatlow, ii. 113

    Tayler, ii. 102

    Taylor, i. 355 _et seq._, 485, 486, 492, 493, 517; ii. 102, 103,
        113, 152, 229, 232, 236, 237, 273, 280, 297, 310, 311, 319,
        334, 340, 353, 394, 401, 436, 537

    Tearne, ii. 529

    Tebbs, ii. 537

    Telwright, ii. 150, 306, 307

    Tennyson, ii. 223

    Thenard, ii. 533

    Thomas, i. 174, 175, 180 _et seq._; ii. 65, 70, 457

    Thomason, ii. 87, 115

    Thompson, i. 489; ii. 1, 4, 5, 8, 161, 535

    Thomson, ii. 515

    Thoresby, i. 156, 460, 466, 528

    Thorley, ii. 343

    Thorn, i. 317

    Thorneloe, i. 224

    Thorneycroft, ii. 526

    Thornhill, i. 188; ii. 3

    Throsby, i. 418

    Thursfield, i. 268, 297, 304, 305

    Thwaites, ii. 535

    Tideswell, ii. 404

    Tilbury, i. 515

    Tildesley, ii. 531

    Tilewright, ii. 150

    Tilghman, ii. 535

    Till, ii. 159, 237, 281, 282, 397, 401, 410

    Tingle, ii. 529

    Tinsley, ii. 279

    Tissington, ii. 143

    Titensor, ii. 307

    Toft, i. 76, 102, 103; ii. 56, 152, 239, 241, 310, 311, 321, 338,
        381, 528

    Tolhausen, ii. 528

    Tomkinson, ii. 428

    Tomkis, i. 299

    Tomlinson, i. 489 _et seq._

    Tomson, ii. 115

    Tongue, ii. 533, 534

    Tonks, ii. 529

    Tooth, ii. 526, 528

    Torr, ii. 536

    Tosh, i. 411

    Town, i. 356

    Townsend, ii. 398, 399

    Trewhitt, ii. 526

    Trible, ii. 457

    Triquet, i. 198

    Trollope, i. 87

    Trotter, i. 160

    Trundell, ii. 111

    Tucker, ii. 537

    Tuckett, i. 335

    Tufnel, i. 344

    Tugby, ii. 162, 535

    Tundley, ii. 272

    Tunnicliffe, ii. 156, 334, 423, 526

    Tunstall, ii. 236

    Turley, ii. 202

    Turner, i, 117, 235, 264, 265, 267–290, 455, 508; ii. 48, 109, 110,
        111, 168, 185, 186, 194, 218, 221, 241, 265, 302, 303, 305,
        418, 428, 437, 448, 525, 532

    Twells, i. 417

    Twemlow, ii. 311

    Twigg, i. 507, 527

    Twisleton, i. 216

    Twiss, i. 218

    Twyford, i. 101; ii. 310, 334, 342, 343

    Tyler, i. 295; ii. 371, 522

    Tynes, i. 89, 90

    Tyrrell, ii. 106

    Tyrwhitt, i. 450


    Ulmann, ii. 537

    Underwood, i. 233; ii. 89

    Unwin, i. 197, 403

    Upton, i. 485


    Vanderkist, i. 209

    Van Hamme, ii. 524

    Varcoe, ii. 187, 190

    Varley, ii. 130, 535

    Vatcher, ii. 537

    Vazie, ii. 525

    Veale, ii. 526

    Venables, ii. 237, 259, 344, 526, 528, 530

    Vere, i. 209, 217

    Vernon, i. 224, 225, 356; ii. 237, 239, 279, 282, 283, 537

    Vidal, ii. 113

    Vidie, ii. 533

    Vigers, ii. 529

    Vigor, i. 353

    Vincent, i. 337

    Voigne, i. 320

    Von Levetzow, ii. 535

    Vowell, i. 405

    Voyez, ii. 299, 300

    Vulliamy, i. 140; ii. 94, 112


    Wade, ii. 297

    Wager, i. 563

    Waghorn, i. 166, 167

    Wagstaffe, i. 156, 160

    Wainwright, i. 469, 472, 519

    Waite, ii. 133

    Wakefield, i. 427

    Wakeman, ii. 467, 471, 472, 473, 475

    Walcot, i. 337

    Walker, i. 159, 260, 277–290, 387, 440, 441, 520; ii. 5, 6, 13,
        101, 104, 105, 224, 262, 263, 264, 265, 266, 267, 394, 423,
        429, 438, 443, 447, 448, 449, 450, 485, 526, 532, 533

    Wall, i. 222, 223, 224, 225, 232, 236, 239, 266; ii. 321, 526, 528

    Wallace, ii. 3

    Walley, ii. 295

    Wallis, ii. 60, 64, 94

    Walpole, i. 171, 188, 211, 460, 461

    Walsh, i. 449

    Walter, ii. 530

    Walters, ii. 393, 395

    Walton, i. 158, 337; ii. 237, 431

    Warburton, i. 473; ii. 1, 6, 236, 295, 296, 297, 302, 303, 304,
        305, 306, 308, 310

    Ward, i. 196, 297; ii. 235, 237, 306, 311, 416

    Wardle, i. 526, 527; ii. 102, 110, 113

    Wareham, ii. 527

    Warland, i. 128

    Warmstrey, i. 224, 225, 227

    Warne, i. 9, 59

    Warner, i. 134, 135, 160, 198

    Warren, i. 217, 218; ii. 5, 31

    Wart, ii. 202

    Water, i. 118

    Waterhouse, i. 306

    Waters, i. 150; ii. 525

    Wathews, ii. 102, 113

    Watkins, i. 171

    Watkinson, i. 218

    Watson, ii. 113

    Watt, i. 366

    Watts, i. 144; ii. 162, 166

    Waught, i. 413

    Way, ii. 527

    Wear, ii. 316

    Weatherby, i. 200 _et seq._; ii. 297

    Weaver, ii. 118, 177, 181

    Webb, i. 258, 304, 353, 397; ii. 190, 393, 528, 538

    Webber, ii. 93, 113, 114

    Webberley, ii. 404

    Webster, i. 228, 463; ii. 93, 102, 114, 125, 442, 449, 537

    Wedekind, ii. 532

    Wedgwood, i. 94, 100, 106, 107, 114, 115, 116, 118, 137, 168, 175,
        196, 197, 211, 275–290, 365 _et seq._, 442, 467, 474, 476,
        478, 479, 481, 487, 489 _et seq._, 523; ii. 14, 30 _et seq._,
        51, 87, 88, 90, 94, 97, 102, 105, 106, 109, 185, 187, 192, 222,
        232, 236, 237, 239, 242, 244, 245, 247, 248, 249, 251, 252,
        271, 281, 284, 287, 298, 299, 300, 301, 302, 315, 326, 327,
        329, 333, 335, 338, 345–385, 389, 401, 413, 414, 417, 418, 420,
        424, 425, 426, 436, 524, 525

    Weigall, i. 435

    Weigelin, ii. 536

    Wellesley, i. 193

    Wellington, ii. 222

    Wells, ii. 102, 114

    Welsby, ii. 53

    Wenden, i. 135

    Wesley, ii. 242, 481

    West, i. 139

    Westaby, ii. 415, 416

    Westendarp, ii. 529

    Westerland, ii. 534

    Whalley, ii. 13, 14, 526

    Wheatstone, i. 491

    Wheeldon, ii. 114

    Wheeler, i. 303

    Wheldon, ii. 134

    Whetstone, i. 422

    Wheway, i. 427

    Whieldon, ii. 167, 168, 185, 232, 242, 349, 412, 413–420

    Whishaw, ii. 526

    Whitaker, ii. 102, 109, 114

    Whitburn, ii. 535

    White, i. 107, 114, 128, 129, 153, 209; ii. 311, 524, 525

    Whitehall, ii. 110

    Whitfield, i. 209, 210

    Whithead, ii. 297, 311, 312, 334, 537

    Whitiall, ii. 102

    Whittington, ii. 122, 224, 272, 280

    Wiggleworth, i. 492

    Wigtoun, i. 265

    Wilbaux, ii. 535

    Wilberforce, i. 521

    Wilcock, i. 197; ii. 359

    Wildblood, ii. 185

    Wilde, i. 133, 134, 160; ii. 459, 461, 463

    Wileman, ii. 159, 411

    Wilkes, i. 201, 448

    Wilkinson, i. 526, 527; ii. 11, 142, 331, 481

    Wilksone, i. 297

    Williams, i. 209, 210, 397, 427, 446; ii. 271, 280, 340, 446, 535,
        537

    Williamson, i. 114; ii. 37, 282, 283, 284, 421, 524

    Willit, i. 353; ii. 282, 340

    Wills, i. 219

    Wilm, ii. 99, 381

    Wilshaw, ii. 238

    Wilson, i. 159, 320, 404, 467, 506; ii. 3, 7, 12, 16, 17, 143, 166,
        301, 320, 499, 503, 525, 531, 534

    Wilton, i. 453

    Wiltshaw, ii. 270

    Windsor, i. 224

    Wingfield, ii. 114

    Winrow, ii. 114

    Winstanley, i. 197; ii. 359

    Winter, i. 276–290; ii. 424

    Winwood, i. 357

    Wirth, ii. 537

    Wise, i. 44, 46

    Wisker, i. 156, 160; ii. 525

    Withers, i. 266; ii. 62, 93, 103, 114

    Withinshaw, ii. 246, 247, 278

    Wohlgemuth, ii. 529

    Wolfe, ii. 224, 233, 235

    Wollams, i. 180–184; ii. 71, 72

    Wolliams, ii. 71

    Wood, i. 135, 179–260, 486; ii. 3, 62, 73, 193, 218, 221, 223, 236,
        242, 243, 246, 270, 271, 273, 279, 280, 283, 287, 288, 290,
        293, 295, 297, 399, 414, 423, 427, 430, 433, 526, 532, 534,
        536–538

    Woodall, ii. 258

    Woodbury, ii. 532

    Woodcroft, i. 124; ii. 524

    Woodhouse, i. 417

    Woodington, i. 435

    Woods, ii. 43

    Woodward, ii. 63, 110, 158, 451, 452

    Wooley, ii. 392

    Woolf, i. 492, 493, 518; ii. 39, 224, 412, 531, 532

    Woorrill, i. 135, 254; ii. 529

    Wornell, ii. 156

    Worsnop, ii. 534

    Worss, ii. 536

    Worssam, ii. 532

    Worthington, ii. 45 _et seq._, 342, 532

    Wrede, i. 405

    Wrench, i. 135

    Wright, i. 24, 26, 44, 71, 72, 397, 433; ii. 94, 116, 117, 119,
        121, 195, 198, 199, 203, 423, 525, 526, 532

    Wrigley, ii. 535

    Wyatt, i. 251, 309 _et seq._, 433; ii. 202

    Wyer, i. 417

    Wyke, i. 265

    Wyndham, i. 460, 461

    Wynn, i. 135, 404

    Wyon, ii. 378


    Yapp, ii. 531

    Yate, i. 275–290

    Yates, i. 94; ii. 102, 103, 110, 114, 297, 310, 311, 525

    Yelland, i. 323

    Yellowley, ii. 4

    Yeo, ii. 441

    Yeoman, i. 492

    York, i. 172; ii. 39

    Young, i. 274, 305; ii. 8, 14, 437, 441, 448, 449, 509, 516, 517


    Zambra, ii. 529

    Zetland, ii. 518


                               THE END.


        PRINTED BY VIRTUE AND CO., LIMITED, CITY ROAD, LONDON.




                       NEW FINE ART PUBLICATIONS

                               FOR 1878.


                  THE WORKS OF J. M. W. TURNER, R.A.

With a Biographical Sketch, and Critical and Descriptive Notes. By
JAMES DAFFORNE. With 30 Engravings on Steel after well-known
Pictures by the Artist. Imperial 4to, elegantly bound, gilt edges,
price £2 2s.


                  STUDIES BY SIR EDWIN LANDSEER, R.A.

From the Collection of Her Majesty the Queen, and other sources. With a
History of his Art Life. By W. COSMO MONKHOUSE. With numerous
Illustrations never before published. Imperial 4to, elegantly bound,
gilt edges, price £2 2s.


         A NEW SERIES OF PICTURES BY SIR EDWIN LANDSEER, R.A.

With Descriptions by W. COSMO MONKHOUSE. Containing 17 Engravings on
Steel, executed in the finest style by leading Artists. Imperial 4to,
elegantly bound, gilt edges, price 21s.


                    THE ALBERT MEMORIAL, HYDE PARK:

Its History and Description. With numerous Illustrations engraved on
Steel. By JAMES DAFFORNE. Imperial 4to, elegantly bound, gilt
edges, price 25s.


                   ST. JOHN AND THE SEVEN CHURCHES.

By the Rev. ROBERT VAUGHAN. Illustrated with Engravings on
Steel. Imperial 4to, elegantly bound, gilt edges, price 15s.


               VIRTUE & CO., LIMITED, CITY ROAD, LONDON.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] See “North Hylton.”

[2] This may be seen in the Museum of Practical Geology, London.

[3] The following were the proportions of the ingredients used by
Pennington:--“Pennington’s body, March 18, 1769--Bone ashes, 60 lb.;
lyme sand, 40 lb.; flint, 35t frit. To every 60 of the above 20 lbs. of
clay.”

[4] “Christian’s china body (January, 1769). To 100 parts rock: flint,
24 parts; best flint glass, 6 parts; small glass, 6 parts; crown glass,
6 parts. To every 20 lbs. of the above put 1 lb. of salts. Glaze--4
china body (foreign): 16 flint glass; 3 white lead; 12 oz. of pearl
ashes.”

[5] Many of the early productions of these works have a peculiar green
tinge about them. This was the effect of the copper, which for some
time tainted the manufactory.

[6] For an account of the Roman pot-works at Wilderspool, near this
place, see vol. i. p. 51.

[7] This deed will be found printed _in extenso_ on page 63.

[8] See the “Life of William Hutton and the History of the Hutton
Family,” edited by Llewellynn Jewitt, 1872, p. 13.

[9] It may be well to note that my history of the Derby China Works
appeared in January, 1862, and Mr. Chaffers’ first edition of his book
was published in 1863; my history of these works, and information which
I supplied him, being mainly the foundation of his notice.

[10] For all the information connected with this purchase and the
removal of the Chelsea moulds, &c., to Derby (which it would be
needless to repeat here) see my account of the Chelsea China Works in
the first volume of this book. (Vol. 1. p. 176, _et seq._)

[11] This painter is also, besides being written Boreman, sometimes
entered as Bowerman, and as Bowman, and is undoubtedly the same as Mr.
Marryat, in his “History of Porcelain,” erroneously calls Beaumont. He
was afterwards employed at Derby.

[12] Mottoes.

[13] Shipped for Derby, and therefore paid for from there.

[14] Cordwood--charcoal.

[15] For other extracts from the Weekly Bills, etc., see vol. 1., pp.
179 to 183.

[16] The letters and other particulars concerning this demolition and
removal will be found in vol. 1, pages 184–5.

[17] In 1787 the weekly wages paid at the works seem to have been about
£34. In 1790 there were eleven hands employed in gilding and eight in
burnishing, and more burnishers were required.

[18] A notable instance occurs with regard to the design and
arrangement and pose of the figure of Lord Howe (modelled by Coffee),
the curious and interesting letters concerning which I possess. Another
instance was with regard to a bust of Sir Richard Arkwright, for which,
by “desire of Mr. Strutt,” Mr. Duesbury had a plaster cast taken from
the face of Sir Richard, and had also Wright’s picture lent him by
Mr. Strutt. Another instance occurred over a service made for the
Duchess of Northumberland in 1795, a letter regarding which, in my own
possession, says that the six comports are put into Wright’s hands.

[19] At this time, among other memoranda, I find he had produced “4
knife hands,” for which he was paid £3 13_s._ 6_d._; and a
“small figure of Meditation,” for which he had two guineas; and was
paid six guineas for eighteen days’ work at Aston.

[20] One of these letters is so amusing that I cannot resist printing
it. It is as follows:--“SIR,--I received your favor of the
24th Inst only this day, in Answer I shall tell you that on the 7th
Inst I wrote to Spengler to know from whether he had settled with you
that I might know whether I was discharged from my bail, he answered
me the 9th that he was working indefatigably to bring under the
pretended debt (as he call’d it) and that he was allowed out of his
weekly wages barely to maintain himself upon this I thought he would
continue to work ’till at he had compleatly discharged your debt. But
how great was my astonishment when last Saturday sen’night I saw him
arrive, in the most pity full condition. I asked him immediately what
brought hither, and whether he had settled with you and cleared me of
my responsibility, I recd. no other answer, but that nobody would ever
ask me any thing and that you owed him money; without saying any thing
more he sat down to dinner with me, and after dinner he went up into
my room to shave himself and dress his hair; a little while after my
servant going up to make my bed found him in it she told him he could
not remain in the house, all the rooms being engaged, he begged to be
left to take a little rest (being very ill) and he would rise again. I
good naturedly never intended to disturb him, and thought him really
asleep in my room! ’till 11 o’clock when I went up to take a few things
I wanted I found he was gone, and on looking round I missed several
things which he has made free with to the am^t. of £4 4_s._
Notwithstanding this I think he is still in London or its vicinity.
and that he will have impudence enough to call on me or to write:
However I give up every thought of making any good of him. Therefore
must beg you to dispose to the best advantage of those things he left
in yr possession, and to let me know what further sum is coming to
you, without any more law proceedings. When I know your demand I shall
endeavour to settle it with Mr. Lygo to whom you may give orders for
the purpose I remain Sir Yr most obedt. Hble servt H. HURTER

“London 28th Novr 1792”

[21] See Vol. I., pp. 139 to 141.

[22] For an account of those works see later on in this volume.

[23] The following brief pedigree, which I have drawn up from the
parish registers, and other sources, gives all needful information
regarding his family:--

                  WILLIAM BILLINGSLEY  ===MARY
                  of Derby, buried at   | survived her husband.
                  St. Alkmund’s, Derby, |
                  4th March, 1770.      |
                                        |
        +-----------------------+-------+-------------+--------+---------+
        |                       |       |             |        |         |
    WILLAM        ===SARAH    SARAH   ELIAS ===MARY  MARY    SARAH   POSTHUMIA
    BILLINGSLEY,   | RIGLEY,  BIL-    BIL-   |       BIL-    BIL-    BILLINGS-
    bap. at St.    | married  LINGS-  LINGS- |       LINGS-  LINGS-  LEY,
    Alkmund’s,     | at St.   LEY,    LEY.   |       LEY,    LEY,    “daughter
    Derby,         | Alk-     bap.           |       bap. 4  bap. 1  of Mary
    12 Oct., 1758, | mund’s,  21             |       Oct.,   Oct.,   Billings-
    apprenticed    | Derby.   Jan.,          |       1763.   1764,   ley,
    to Duesbury    | 4th      1760,          |               bur.    widow,”
    26 Sep. 1774,  | Nov.,    bur.,          |               27      bap.
    china painter, | 1780.    24th           |               Sep.,   3 June,
    etc.           |          July,          |               1773.   1770.
                   |          1764.          |
                   |                         +-----------------------+
       +-----------+---------------+-----------------+               |
       |                           |                 |               |
    SARAH       ===GEORGE        JAMES     LAVINIA BILLINGSLEY,   JAMES
    BILLINGSLEY,   WALKER,       BIL-      bap. 1 Nov., 1795.     BILLINGSLEY,
    bap. 14        china maker,  LINGS-    (In the register this  bap. 3 Nov.,
    Sep., 1783,    who was       LEY,      is oddly entered;      1795.
    buried at      associated    bap.      “Samuel,” being
    the parish     with          11 Aug.,  substituted for
    Church of      Billingsley.  1793,     “Sarah.”) died at
    Swansea,                     bur.      Nantgarw, and was
    January 4th,                 12 Nov.,  buried at Eglwysilan,
    1817, aged                   1793.     Sep. 10, 1817. In the
    31, as                                 register of that
    appears by                             parish she is entered
    the                                    as “Levinia, daughter
    registers of                           of William and Sarah
    that Church,                           Beeley, Nantgarw,”
    copied for                             aged 21 years.[25]
    me by Rev.
    T. D.
    Thompson.


[24] Frequently, but erroneously, called “Beaumont,” “Bowerman,” or
“Bowman.”

[25] For this entry I have to thank the Rev. Rice Jones, M.A., the
Vicar of Eglwysilan.

[26] The names down to this line are in the second William Duesbury’s
handwriting, and have, been crossed through.

[27] The names from here forward seem to have been the originally
written ones of 1787.

[28] Notice.

[29] “Mr. Billingsley, at the Nantgarrow manufactory, from Lynn sand,
potash, and other components, made a porcelain which, as an artificial
felspar, has some excellence, and approaches nearest real felspar; the
expense certainly was great; and only was his ware defective through
his being unacquainted with the _principles_ of combinative
potency. This was a notable instance how much the mechanical processes
of pottery are in advance of the ‘work and labour of love’ for public
benefit--the science of chemistry in regard to atoms.”--SHAW’S
_Chemistry of Pottery_, 1837.

[30] It is worthy of note that Billingsley was a common name about
Broseley and Madeley; the entries in the parish registers are very
numerous.

[31] This agreement I have printed entire in my “Life of Wedgwood,” p.
347.

[32] Whittington, it must be borne in mind, is a place of considerable
historical and antiquarian interest. The family of De Whittington, to
which “Dick Whittington” belonged, took its rise and its name from this
place; and at the “Cock and Pynot” ale-house here, the great Revolution
of 1688 was planned; the “Revolution House” and the “plotting-chair”
being matters known to most historical readers. Here, too, the Rev.
Samuel Pegge, the great antiquarian writer, lived; he being Rector of
Whittington. “Pynot,” it may be added, is the provincial name for the
magpie.

[33] Amongst many other works, Mr. Arthur Jewitt was author of “The
History of Buxton,” “History of Lincoln,” “Lincolnshire Cabinet,”
“Hand-book of Perspective,” “Hand-book of Geometry,” &c., and he
contributed largely to the _Penny Magazine_, Brayley’s _Graphic
and Historical Illustrator_, &c., &c. He was the intimate friend
of Edward Wedlake Brayley, of John Britton, of Ebenezer Rhodes, and
others. He was born in 1772 and died in 1852, on his 80th birthday.

[34] I am informed by W. Drury Lowe, Esq., owner of the estates, that
a Roman coin in his possession was found in an old working of the
ironstone pits.

[35] The only other examples I have met with of porcelain tokens issued
by china works are those issued by the Worcester Porcelain Company,
which have been described on page 254, vol. I.

[36] For a full account of this discovery see the _Reliquary_,
vol. viii., pp. 129 to 140.

[37] See page 74, vol. i.

[38] Other urns from this place are engraved in vol. i., Figs. 233 to
242.

[39] In this partnership Mr. Copeland had no interest in the works, and
Mr. Spode’s interest in the London house was comparatively small.

[40] Many of the old Derby models, moulds, etc., passed into the hands
of Mr. Alderman Copeland, and have been made available by the firm.

[41] Recently purchased by the present head of the firm, C. Minton
Campbell, Esq., M.P.

[42] Then the principal inn, removed thirty years ago to make room for
the new market buildings.

[43] The price (1873) delivered in the Potteries was £2 10_s._

[44] A bust of my dear old friend, Mr. S. C. Hall, editor of the _Art
Journal_, has, since this was written, been prepared for me by Mr.
Goss, from Gallimore’s modelling. It is a splendid work of Art, and, as
a likeness, is perfect.

[45] For the entire extract, containing many interesting particulars,
see vol. i., p. 97.

[46] A copy of these indentures is printed in my “Life of Wedgwood,”
pages 66–7. They are signed by “Ralph Wood,” “Aaron Wood,” and “Dr.
Tho. Wedgwood,” and witnessed by “Sara =X=[symbol] Wood, her
mark,” and “Jos. Allen.”

[47] The managing man at this time was T. Heath.

[48] Mr. Lakin travelled for orders at this time.

[49] It is said that a John Shrigley in 1765 built the largest hovel of
his day, and that it fell to pieces soon after the last brick was laid.

[50] Probably from the manufactory at Cliff Bank, previously worked by
D. Bird. Shaw says that those works were had by T. Mayer in 1829, and
continues, “We shall just notice here that Mr. T. Mayer has succeeded
in a _chef d’œuvre_ of the Art of Pottery, by many considered
as the best Specimen of Solid Earthenware hitherto produced. It
is an Earthenware Table, of truly elegant workmanship, thirty-two
inches diameter, on an elegant pedestal of proportionate dimensions,
ornamented in a very chaste style, with subject from National History.”

[51] Vol. I., p. 350.

[52] “The Wedgwoods; being a Life of Josiah Wedgwood, with Notices of
his Works and their Productions,” &c. By Llewellynn Jewitt, F.S.A.
London: Virtue & Co., 1865. 1 vol. 8vo, illustrated.

[53] For memoir of Bentley and others see my Life of Wedgwood.

[54] While speaking of the Portland Vase I desire to take the
opportunity of putting on record the fact that in 1877 Mr. John
Northwood and Mr. Philip Pargeter completed a unique and matchless work
of art--a literal copy of the Portland Vase in its own material, glass,
and cut by exactly the same process as must have been employed by the
artist of the original one thousands of years back. Of this marvellous
work I gave a careful account in the “Reliquary,” from which I make the
following extract:--“The material is, of course, glass, and, thanks
to the skill and perseverance of Mr. Pargeter, this has been produced
of as nearly as possible the same rich full deep tone of blue colour,
closely approaching to black when seen with the light upon it, but
of vast richness in dark blue when the light passes through it. Upon
this blue body Mr. Pargeter succeeded in laying a layer of fine white
soft opal glass, specially made for the purpose, to a considerable
thickness; and the welding of these two together was a process of
exceeding difficulty. The two kinds of glass, the one being opaque
and the other transparent, are usually of very different degrees of
specific gravity (the usual opal being of much lighter material than
ordinary glass), but for this special purpose they had to be made of
the same degrees of specific gravity and of expansion and contraction.
This difficult task was, through the skill and constant trials of Mr.
Pargeter, brought to a successful result, and the welding accomplished
with the utmost thoroughness and delicacy; not a flaw, or air-bubble,
or even partially-united spot being visible in the whole of the work.
The body of the vase being entirely coated, even to half-way up the
neck, with the opal, it was ready for Mr. Northwood to operate upon,
and he set about his herculean task--one he had desired all his life
to accomplish--with that spirit of determination that ensured success.
For three years he has unceasingly devoted himself to his task, never
working less than six hours a day, and oftener more, at his gem-like
material, and patiently cutting away, by hand, and by hand only, the
opal coating, so as to leave the blue surface clear as a groundwork,
and the figures and other parts of the design in relief. The whole of
the grouping, the figures, the trees, and indeed every minute portion
of the decoration is delicately carved in the opal, and entirely
carved and cut by hand as in the original. By the entire cutting away
of the opal the amethystine glass of the vase itself is cleared and
polished, while by the gradations of thickness in the carving all the
most delicate shades of colour, from the finest white to the sweetest
of all half-tones--produced by leaving simply a thin and fairylike
film of the coating on the body--in blue, are produced. The effect, as
may be imagined, is rich and gorgeous in the extreme; but its general
effect is the least part of its merit; this lies in the nature of the
work itself, in the extreme delicacy and beauty of manipulation, and
in the almost microscopic nicety of its finish. It is literally cameo
engraving in its highest, most difficult, and most beautiful phase; and
the vase, now completed, is indeed, in Art, a ‘gem of the first water,’
and one that can never, in point of execution and in artistic skill, be
surpassed.”

I may also add, while speaking of the Portland Vase, that in 1877 one
of the first fifty was brought to the hammer and realised £273.

[55] Veining, same as in the combed and tortoiseshell wares.

[56] Tortoiseshell ware.

[57] George Walker and his father-in-law, William Billingsley, who had
assumed the name of _Beeley_ or _Bealey_.--(See “Derby” and
“Nantgarw.”)

[58] Of this clever painter Mr. Binns says:--“Baxter was certainly the
most accomplished artist who painted Worcester porcelain in the first
half of the present century, and his productions are the most covetable
works of the time. We have been favoured by his son, Mr. Thomas Baxter,
F.G.S., with a few notes respecting him. It was Mr. Baxter’s early
training, aided by a naturally artistic mind, which enabled him to
take the high position which we have assigned to him. Mr. Baxter’s
grandfather had workshops in London for painting and gilding china;
they were situated at No. 1, Goldsmith Street, Gough Square, Fleet
Street, a locality connected with Worcester from an early date. It was
usual for Mr. Baxter, sen., to obtain white porcelain from France,
Staffordshire, and elsewhere, and decorate for the London dealers.
It appears that Mr. Baxter, jun., was patronised by Lord Nelson, and
frequently employed by him in making sketches at Merton; he also
painted a rich dessert service for his lordship. Many of the celebrated
subjects of the time painted by Sir J. Reynolds, West, and others, were
introduced by him on plaques of porcelain; some of them are now in his
son’s possession, viz., ‘Thetis and Achilles,’ after West; ‘Puck,’
after Sir J. Reynolds; and ‘Boy with Cabbage Nets,’ after the same
artist. Mr. Baxter was also engaged by a celebrated connoisseur, in
London, to copy some of the more remarkable works in his collection.
This gentleman, in his conversation on Art matters, frequently stated
that, in his opinion, there was no decorative Art in England. After his
return from Paris, on one occasion, he showed Mr. Baxter a fine piece
of porcelain which he had purchased in that city, and asked him whether
such a work could be produced in England. To his great surprise,
Mr. Baxter replied that he had painted that very piece himself, in
Goldsmith Street. This little occurrence will give us some idea of the
superior character of our artist’s work, and the effect of his teaching
is evident in Messrs. Flight & Barr’s ornamental productions. Mr.
Baxter established a School of Art during his visit to the city, from
1814 to 1816; and some of those who afterwards distinguished themselves
in connection with the Arts and Art-manufactures of the city formed
part of his class. Amongst these, we may name Doe, Astles, Webster,
Pitman, Lowe, and S. Cole. When Mr. Baxter left Worcester, in 1816, he
went to Mr. Dillwyn, at Swansea, and continued there for three years.
Amongst the special works painted at that establishment, may be named
the ‘Shakespeare Cup,’ now in the possession of his son, and a dessert
service of garden scenery (a style peculiar to himself), which, we
believe, is in the possession of Mr. Dillwyn. Mr. Baxter returned to
Worcester in 1819, and joined Messrs. Flight & Barr’s establishment
again, but subsequently removed to Messrs. Chamberlain’s. The handle of
a well-known vase, formed by horses’ heads, was modelled by Mr. Baxter
from the head of a favourite mare of Messrs. Barr. During Mr. Baxter’s
residence with Messrs. Chamberlain, we believe his principal works were
services; and the last of which he was engaged was a service of fruit,
of which a specimen is in our cabinet. He died in April, 1821.” The
‘Shakespeare Cup’ or goblet, here alluded to, was “turned by Baxter
himself, the form of the leg having the outline of the dramatist’s face
in profile; the cup is adorned, both on its inner and outer side, with
subjects from the plays.”

[59] A notice of Billingsley, his family, and the various works he
founded, will be found on pp. 101 to 105 _ante_.

[60] In reference to these initials, Chaffers absurdly says, “Sometimes
the letters C. W. are found stamped under, which may perhaps mean
‘China Works.’”

[61] “Grave Mounds and their Contents,” “Half Hours among some English
Antiquities,” &c.

[62] “So early as A.M. 3959, we learn from the books of Leinster and
of Lecan, the body of Slanoll, son of Ollamh Fodhla, was buried in the
earth.”

[63] For this and several other of the engravings illustrating this
notice of the ancient fictilia of Ireland, I am indebted to my good
friend the Rev. J. Graves, M.A., and through him to the council of the
“Royal Historical and Archæological Association of Ireland,” whose
truly valuable “Journal” they have graced.

[64] As I have elsewhere explained, this is an error of Sir William’s;
no urns were simply “sun-baked;” they were, there can be no doubt,
burned on the funeral pyre, as already stated.

[65] _Ballydoolough_, the Place or Town of the Dark Lake.

[66] Journal of the House of Commons, Ireland, vol. v., p. 175.

[67] “3_rd_ November 1753, page 181.

[68] “8th November, 1753, page 185, Committee of Supply.

[69] Journal of the House of Commons, Ireland, vol. vii., p. 43.

[70] _Art Journal._

[71] To Messrs. Macmillan & Co., the publishers of this truly important
and invaluable work--a work which ought to be in every library--I am
indebted for the illustrations, Figs. 740 to 759, which through their
courtesy I am enabled to here introduce. To them I beg to tender my
best thanks.


Transcriber’s Notes:

1. Obvious printers’, punctuation and spelling errors have been
corrected silently

2. Where hyphenation is in doubt, it has been retained as in the
original.

3. Some hyphenated and non-hyphenated versions of the same words have
been retained as in the original.

4. Where appropriate, the original spelling has been retained.

5. Superscripts are represented using the caret character, e.g. D^r. or
X^{xx}.

6. Italics are shown as _xxx_.











*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CERAMIC ART OF GREAT BRITAIN FROM PRE-HISTORIC TIMES DOWN TO THE PRESENT DAY, VOLUME 2 (OF 2) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The tale of Mistah Mule
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The tale of Mistah Mule

Author: Arthur Scott Bailey

Release date: July 19, 2024 [eBook #74069]

Language: English

Original publication: New York, NY: Grosset & Dunlap, 1923

Credits: David E. Brown and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALE OF MISTAH MULE ***



[Illustration: Mistah Mule Complains About His Food.

  _The Tale of Mistah Mule._          _Page 24_]




  _SLUMBER-TOWN TALES_

  (Trademark Registered)

  THE TALE OF
  MISTAH MULE

  BY
  ARTHUR SCOTT BAILEY

  [Illustration]

  PUBLISHERS
  GROSSET & DUNLAP
  NEW YORK

  Made in the United States of America




  COPYRIGHT, 1923, BY
  GROSSET & DUNLAP




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                         PAGE

       I JUST A LITTLE JOKE          7

      II GETTING ACQUAINTED         11

     III FARMER GREEN’S TRICK       15

      IV CROWDING THE POLE          19

       V MISTAH MULE’S MEALS        23

      VI SPEAKING OF HORNETS        27

     VII A BALKY PARTNER            31

    VIII A PIECE OF STRING          35

      IX MISTAH MULE BEHAVES        39

       X MINDING TOO WELL           43

      XI TROUBLESOME MR. CROW       47

     XII TWO BLACK RASCALS          51

    XIII MISTAH MULE LAUGHS         55

     XIV OBLIGING A LADY            59

      XV TOO MANY QUESTIONS         63

     XVI ALL ABOUT GHOSTS           67

    XVII MINDING HIS MOTHER         71

   XVIII GOING FOR A DRIVE          75

     XIX THE RACE                   79

      XX THE LOAD OF HAY            83

     XXI THE BLACKSMITH WINS        87

    XXII TURKEY PROUDFOOT           91

   XXIII A PLAN GOES WRONG          95

    XXIV THE UMBRELLA               99

     XXV BRIGHT AND BROAD          103

    XXVI A QUEER KIND OF RACE      107

   XXVII A GOOD RACE SPOILED       111

  XXVIII UNEXPECTED HELP           115




THE TALE OF MISTAH MULE




I

JUST A LITTLE JOKE


There was a great flurry in the farmyard. Old dog Spot was yelping;
Henrietta Hen was clucking; Turkey Proudfoot was gobbling; Grunty Pig
was squealing.

“For pity’s sake! What has happened?” Miss Kitty Cat asked the old
horse Ebenezer, who stood tied to a hitching-post near the woodshed
steps.

Ebenezer switched his tail at a fly on his flank before he spoke.

“Didn’t you see what Farmer Green led into the barn a few minutes
ago?” he inquired.

“No! What was it?” Miss Kitty answered eagerly.

The old horse Ebenezer yawned, as if there was something that made him
very, very weary.

“It was a most peculiar person,” he told Miss Kitty Cat. “I made myself
known to him; and asked him his name. He said it was ‘Mistah Mule.’ And
then what do you think he did?”

Miss Kitty couldn’t guess.

“He tried to kick me,” said old Ebenezer in a tone of great disgust.

“Is he going to live here? Or is he only a guest?” Miss Kitty Cat
wanted to know.

“He’s here to stay until Farmer Green gets tired of him,” Ebenezer
explained. “The worst of it is, he’s going to have a stall right
next to mine. I know already that I shall not enjoy having him as a
next-door neighbor.”

All at once there was a great commotion in the barn. First came a
thumping, pounding noise. Then Farmer Green’s voice rose above the
racket. And next followed an odd sound, “Hee-haw! Hee-haw!”

“What’s that?” Miss Kitty Cat cried.

“It’s Mistah Mule,” Ebenezer told her. “He’s laughing. I wonder what
the joke is.”

At that moment old dog Spot came scurrying out of the barn. He had his
tail tucked between his legs; and his face wore a frightened look.

“What’s the joke?” the horse Ebenezer called to him.

“Mistah Mule just kicked Farmer Green,” Spot yelped. “And then Mistah
Mule laughed. Didn’t you hear him?”

Ebenezer nodded.

“Did Farmer Green laugh at the joke too?” asked Miss Kitty Cat.

“He did not,” old Spot howled. “He was so angry that he scared me;
though goodness knows I had nothing to do with the affair. I was merely
an onlooker.”

“Are you sure you didn’t nip at Mistah Mule’s heels?” the horse
inquired.

“Not I!” Spot assured him. “A good many years ago I went too near
a Mule’s heels down at the village. And I’ve never forgotten what
happened.”




II

GETTING ACQUAINTED


Farmer Green’s old horse, Ebenezer, stood in the barn and gazed none
too pleasantly over the partition at his new neighbor in the next stall.

His neighbor, Mistah Mule, cocked one of his black ears at Ebenezer.

“Ole hoss,” he said with something like a grin, “I and you is goin’ to
be hitched up together in the mornin’.”

This news almost took Ebenezer’s breath away.

“What!” he exclaimed. “Is Farmer Green going to work us in double
harness? I--I can hardly believe it.”

“That what he done told his boy,” Mistah Mule declared. “But don’t you
go to worryin’ yourself ’bout _work_. I kin show you plenty tricks to
git outer workin’.”

The old horse Ebenezer stared coldly at Mistah Mule. Ebenezer was no
shirk. And he didn’t like the thought of being driven with a lazy
partner like this one.

“Where was your home before you came here?” he asked Mistah Mule.

“My real home is ’way down South,” the newcomer informed him. “I come
North last spring. An’ I been spendin’ my time over where they buildin’
the new railroad.”

“So you’ve been working on the railroad this summer!” Ebenezer
exclaimed.

“Not _workin’_ exactly!” said Mistah Mule. “You might say I been
_balkin’_.”

“What!” Ebenezer gasped. “Are you balky, sometimes?”

“I most gen’rally is,” said Mistah Mule. And then he gave his odd
laugh, “Hee-haw! Hee-haw!”

“Let me give you a bit of advice,” said the old horse, looking very
solemn. “Just forget all such tricks as balking and kicking. You’ve
come to make your home among kind people. You’ll be well treated here.
And you ought to behave politely. When Farmer Green asks you to work, I
hope you’ll do your best.”

Mistah Mule threw back his head and showed his yellow teeth in a
disagreeable grin.

“I has to have my fun,” he remarked. “Sometimes I has it one way;
sometimes another.”

“You’ll have the best of times on this farm,” Ebenezer advised Mistah
Mule, “if only you’ll be gentle and willing. I’ve lived here all my
life; and I couldn’t ask for a better home. And I’ve always tried to
behave myself.”

“Don’t you never kick?” Mistah Mule inquired.

“Oh, yes! When I’m in the pasture I sometimes kick.”

“I calls that kickin’ _up_,” Mistah Mule retorted with a snort. “What
about kickin’ _folks_?”

“Never! Never!” Ebenezer replied in a shocked tone.

Just then a step told them that Farmer Green had entered the barn.

“Just watch out, if he comes near me!” Mistah Mule warned Ebenezer.




III

FARMER GREEN’S TRICK


Mistah Mule had told the old horse, Ebenezer, to watch out, if Farmer
Green came near him. And Ebenezer knew what his new neighbor meant by
that. He intended to kick Farmer Green again.

Ebenezer soon saw that Farmer Green had a plan in his head. He called
to the hired man. And then they both came up with a long, stout pole,
one end of which they thrust into a front corner of Mistah Mule’s
stall. Holding the other end of the pole, which stuck out a safe
distance behind Mistah Mule’s heels, the hired man pushed the pole far
over, crowding Mistah Mule firmly against a side of his stall.

“There!” said Farmer Green. “He can’t kick now.” And then Farmer Green
walked boldly in beside Mistah Mule and untied his halter-strap. He
backed that black rascal out of the stall, turned him around on the
barn floor, and then backed him in again.

Mistah Mule now stood facing to the rear. He looked somewhat puzzled
when Farmer Green fastened the halter-strap around the upright post
on his left. He looked more puzzled when Farmer Green snapped another
strap to his halter, wrapping the end of this one securely about a post
on his right.

“Now,” Farmer Green remarked with a chuckle, “we can walk past this
fellow’s stall without having to dodge his heels.”

Meanwhile Farmer Green’s son Johnnie had come in to watch what happened
to Mistah Mule. “Won’t he bite?” he asked his father.

“No!” said Farmer Green. “He’s too wise to wear out his teeth on
anything except food.”

Johnnie Green then slipped in beside Ebenezer and gave him an apple.
Out of the corner of his eye, Mistah Mule saw Ebenezer take the gift.
And when Ebenezer began to munch the apple, Mistah Mule spoke. “I is
waitin’ for a apple,” he remarked. But Johnnie Green went away without
giving him any.

“You see!” said Ebenezer to his new neighbor. “If you had behaved
yourself, Johnnie would have treated you too.”

“I wouldn’t ’a bit him,” Mistah Mule answered.

“He doesn’t trust you,” Ebenezer retorted. “And I must say that I don’t
blame him.”

“It ain’t right,” Mistah Mule complained, “to give a no-account ole
hoss like you a apple, and not give one to a valuable young critter
like my own self.”

“Valuable!” Ebenezer exclaimed with a slight smile. “I hear that your
former owners _gave you away_ to Farmer Green because they couldn’t do
anything with you.”

Mistah Mule hung his head. For once he was silent.




IV

CROWDING THE POLE


On the next day after Mistah Mule’s arrival at Farmer Green’s place
there followed something that the old horse Ebenezer had been dreading.
Farmer Green harnessed Mistah Mule and Ebenezer to a strong wagon.

“I suppose I ought not to complain, if this helps Farmer Green,”
Ebenezer thought. “But I can’t help feeling that he might have spared
me this disgrace. To be harnessed with a good-natured Mule would be
bad enough. But to be harnessed with a kicking, balky fellow like this
Mistah Mule is a thousand times worse.”

Ebenezer sighed as Farmer Green climbed into the wagon and picked up
the reins. But he started willingly, as he always had, when Farmer
Green spoke.

To Ebenezer’s surprise, his mate started too. He had expected Mistah
Mule to balk.

“I see you’ve decided to behave,” Ebenezer remarked to him.

“Just you wait, ole hoss, until he asks me to draw a load,” Mistah Mule
answered. “I doesn’t mind pullin’ a empty wagon a little ways. I likes
to stretch my legs once in a while. But I doesn’t aim to do any reg’lar
work. I never has done any. Why should I now?”

On the whole, Ebenezer had little fault to find with Mistah Mule’s
behavior on their drive. Farmer Green put no load into the wagon.
He merely jogged Mistah Mule and Ebenezer around what everybody in
Pleasant Valley knew as the “Four-mile Square”; then drove them home.
And Mistah Mule trotted along and stopped and started whenever Farmer
Green gave the word.

Mistah Mule was almost a gentleman, except for one thing. He kept
“crowding the pole,” as Farmer Green called it. He insisted on
squeezing himself up against the wagon-pole, which was between him and
Ebenezer. More than once Ebenezer told him to “move over.” But Mistah
Mule might have had no ears at all, instead of great long ones, for all
he seemed to hear.

This unpleasant trick annoyed Ebenezer. But he did not let it worry
him. He had known young colts that tried it. And Ebenezer remembered
that Farmer Green had a way of stopping it.

After Farmer Green had led Ebenezer into his stall, and backed Mistah
Mule into his, he called to the boy Johnnie: “Bring me an old piece of
leather, some long tacks, and a hammer!”

When he heard that, Ebenezer pricked up his ears.

“What’s this Farmer Green aimin’ to do now?” Mistah Mule asked him.

“You’ll find out the next time he drives us,” Ebenezer told him. And he
would say nothing more.




V

MISTAH MULE’S MEALS


Mistah Mule had a hearty appetite. And he was not at all backward about
demanding food. Towards meal-time he would begin to paw the floor. And
though the old horse Ebenezer told him again and again to stop, he paid
not the slightest heed.

“You won’t be fed any sooner for making such a racket,” Ebenezer warned
him.

“The longer they waits before they feeds me, the more noise I kin
make,” Mistah Mule retorted. And Ebenezer had to admit that that seemed
to be true.

Now, Mistah Mule always ate all his hay--and wanted another serving.
But he wouldn’t touch the grain that Farmer Green set before him in a
box. At least, he wouldn’t eat it. However, he stuck his nose near it,
if it was ground corn and oats, and blew into it in a most ill-bred
manner, so that the grain flew in every direction. Whole oats he would
hardly even look at.

Old Ebenezer watched his neighbor’s actions with great scorn.

“What’s the matter with you?” he asked Mistah Mule at last. “Why don’t
you eat your grain?”

“’Cause I doesn’t care for any kind they’s given me,” Mistah Mule
explained. “I is used to havin’ whole corn served to me. An’ I doesn’t
see why folks ’spects me to eat what I doesn’t like. I reckon this
Farmer Green’ll learn to take a hint before long.”

Well, strange to say, that very day Mistah Mule shot a glance of
triumph at Ebenezer, because of something Farmer Green said to the
hired man.

“I declare,” Farmer Green exclaimed, “I don’t see why this mule won’t
eat his grain. There can’t be anything wrong with his teeth, for he
chews his hay. The only reason I can think of is that he has always
been fed something else; and he’s so stubborn he won’t eat what we give
him.”

“Maybe he has had whole corn,” the hired man suggested.

Farmer Green nodded.

“I’ll hitch him and Ebenezer up and drive down to the gristmill,” he
said. “Perhaps the miller has some corn that he hasn’t ground yet.”

Ebenezer chuckled when he heard that. But he wasn’t pleased because
Mistah Mule was going to get the kind of grain he wanted. No! Ebenezer
was thinking what a surprise Mistah Mule was going to have when he
crowded over against the wagon-pole, as he had when Farmer Green drove
them together the day before.

He hadn’t forgotten that Farmer Green had asked Johnnie to bring him a
piece of leather, some tacks, and a hammer.




VI

SPEAKING OF HORNETS


Farmer Green had started for the gristmill, driving that ill-matched
pair, rascally Mistah Mule and the staid old horse, Ebenezer. When they
had swung into the road in front of the farmhouse, Mistah Mule played
again that trick which had annoyed Ebenezer the day before. Laying
his ears back, he sidled over toward Ebenezer and pressed his flank
against the wagon-pole. He knew that the trick bothered Ebenezer. Had
not Ebenezer ordered him, yesterday, to “move over”? He knew that it
annoyed Farmer Green too. For Farmer Green had spoken to him and tried
to guide him aside by pulling on a rein.

Just for a moment Mistah Mule leaned heavily against the wagon-pole.
And then he sprang away as if he had touched a red-hot coal. He plunged
wildly, switched his tail, and threatened to kick.

Farmer Green tightened the reins and called to him in a calm, firm
voice, “Steady, boy! Whoa! Whoa!”

Mistah Mule soon stopped his struggling. “A whole swarm of hornets done
stung me,” he said to Ebenezer. “Didn’t they sting you, ole hoss?”

“I felt nothing,” Ebenezer replied.

For a few minutes Mistah Mule stayed on his own side of the road, where
he belonged. But as soon as his skin stopped tingling he edged over
toward the wagon-pole once more.

The old horse Ebenezer chuckled.

“Mistah Mule will get stung again as soon as he touches the pole,” he
said to himself. He wondered how many times Mistah Mule would press
against the sharp tacks which Farmer Green had driven through a piece
of leather and then nailed to the wagon-pole, with their ends pointing
at Mistah Mule. It was no wonder that when they pricked him, Mistah
Mule thought they were hornets.

Old Ebenezer watched his team-mate narrowly. Soon he both saw and felt
Mistah Mule lurch against the pole. No sooner had the black rascal
touched it than he sprang away again with a grunt.

“Hornets agin!” he exclaimed. “Sakes alive! I declare I never see such
a powerful lot as they is hereabouts.”

“Maybe if you kept away from the wagon-pole they wouldn’t touch you,”
Ebenezer suggested.

“Shucks! What’s the pole got to do with my bein’ stung by these here
hornets?” And Mistah Mule “crowded the pole” again--to use Farmer
Green’s words.

“Ole hoss, you’re right!” he snorted as he leaped aside. “I declare
these is the queerest hornets I ever did see.”




VII

A BALKY PARTNER


Farmer Green tied Mistah Mule and the old horse Ebenezer to the fence
beside the gristmill and went inside the old gray building to talk with
the miller.

While he was gone, Mistah Mule took great pains to keep a safe distance
from the wagon-pole. He scolded Ebenezer when that mild fellow moved
the pole even as little as an inch toward his companion.

“I’se been stung three times,” Mistah Mule grumbled. “I doesn’t care to
be stung agin.”

“I can’t stand perfectly still and let the flies bite me,” Ebenezer
retorted. “I have to stamp once in a while, to drive them away.”

“Flies!” Mistah Mule sniffed. “I doesn’t mind flies bitin’ me. It’s
hornets I objects to.”

Old Ebenezer couldn’t help thinking what a dull fellow Mistah Mule
was. It hadn’t once occurred to him that what he called hornet-stings
was caused by the pricks of the sharp tacks which Farmer Green had
fastened to the wagon-pole in order to teach Mistah Mule to stay where
he belonged.

In a few minutes Farmer Green appeared in the wide doorway of the
gristmill, dragging a heavy sack, which he dropped at the threshold.
Then he leaped down upon the ground and walked toward Mistah Mule and
Ebenezer.

“There’s your corn that you’ve been wanting,” Ebenezer told Mistah
Mule. “Farmer Green is going to drive us up to the doorway and load
the sack into the wagon.”

“I’se willin’ to help pull the empty wagon across the yard,” said
Mistah Mule. “But after Farmer Green loads that heavy sack into it, I
aims to stay right where I is.”

“What!” cried Ebenezer. “Are you going to balk? Aren’t you going to
help draw your own corn home to the barn?”

There was a very surly look in Mistah Mule’s left eye, which was
nearest Ebenezer, as he answered, “I doesn’t crave to do any work, even
for my own self.”

Farmer Green now untied this strange pair, turned them around, and
backed the wagon up to the gristmill door. Then he dumped the sack of
corn into the back of the wagon, sat down upon the seat, picked up the
reins, and said, “Giddap!”

“Now, don’t be silly!” said Ebenezer to his companion. “This load is
nothing. We’ll have it in the barn before you know it.” And he started
forward.

“I’se a person of my word,” Mistah Mule declared. And planting his
forefeet firmly in front of him, he refused to budge from that spot.




VIII

A PIECE OF STRING


The old horse Ebenezer struggled forward, trying to pull both the wagon
and his stubborn mate, Mistah Mule. But Farmer Green soon called,
“Whoa, Ebenezer!” And then Ebenezer stood still.

Farmer Green sat upon the wagon-seat, looking down at Mistah Mule, when
the miller, all white with flour, came to his door and peered out.

“What! Are you still here? I thought you had gone,” he said.

“This mule,” Farmer Green explained, “likes your place so much he
doesn’t want to go home.”

“Balky, eh?” the miller inquired with a grin. “Well, it’s a nice day. I
wish I had nothing to do but sit out there in the sunshine.”

“I don’t expect to sit here long,” Farmer Green replied. “Just let me
have a bit of string, please!”

The miller passed him a piece of the twine that he used for tying his
meal sacks.

Mistah Mule paid no heed to this talk, nor to what happened. His mind
was full of one idea. And that was that nobody should make him stir a
single step until the sack of corn was taken out of the wagon. With all
four legs planted firmly upon the ground, with his head hung low and
his long ears drooping, he looked very silly, and sulky, and stubborn.

“Come!” Ebenezer urged him. “Don’t make trouble for Farmer Green!”

“Save your breath!” Mistah Mule retorted. “I knows what I wants to do.
An’ if they whips me, I’se a-goin’ to kick.”

“My! my!” said the old horse Ebenezer to himself. “I hope none of my
friends sees me harnessed with this terrible person. I’m ashamed to be
hitched to the same wagon with him.”

Meanwhile Farmer Green had jumped out of the wagon. And now he stood at
Mistah Mule’s head. Watching, Ebenezer saw him tie the short length of
cord tightly about Mistah Mule’s right ear.

“What for did he do that?” Mistah Mule asked Ebenezer.

“I don’t know,” Ebenezer replied. “Nothing like that ever happened to
me.”

“This string certainly do feel queer on my ear,” Mistah Mule muttered.

Then Farmer Green climbed into the wagon again. “Giddap!” he said once
more. And this time both Ebenezer and Mistah Mule started together.
They walked out of the gristmill yard and trotted up the road towards
home.

Mistah Mule had thought so much about that string around his ear that
he had forgotten to be balky anymore!




IX

MISTAH MULE BEHAVES


Mistah Mule hadn’t been long at Farmer Green’s place before he and
Johnnie Green became better acquainted. Johnnie learned that whatever
other faults Mistah Mule might have, he didn’t bite. So Johnnie began
to bring two apples to the barn--one for the old horse Ebenezer and
one for Mistah Mule. Facing backward in his stall, so that his heels
could do no one any harm, Mistah Mule used to munch the apples with a
very happy look upon his face. He seemed so friendly that Johnnie Green
began to tease his father to let him ride Mistah Mule.

At first Farmer Green said, “No!” But Johnnie could see no harm in
asking him the same question day after day. Johnnie had sometimes known
his father to change his mind. And sure enough! at last Farmer Green
said, “Maybe you can ride the mule some day. But I want to ride him
first. I want to see if he’s safe for you.”

Then, instead of saying to his father, “Will you please let me ride the
mule to-day?” Johnnie began to put this question to him: “Won’t you
ride the mule to-day, please?”

It seemed to Johnnie that his father had never been so busy. Farmer
Green now had a hundred things to do, not one of which could wait while
he saddled Mistah Mule and rode him. But Johnnie teased so much that
Farmer Green finally took the time to do what he asked. He rode Mistah
Mule up the road and back.

Somewhat to his surprise, Mistah Mule behaved very well.

“He’s a fine saddle animal,” Farmer Green told Johnnie as he jumped
down from Mistah Mule’s back. “He may have some tricks that he didn’t
try to play on me. Ride him, if you want to. But stay in the meadow. If
he should throw you, it wouldn’t hurt you so much to fall on the grass
as on the hard road.”

Johnnie Green was already shortening the stirrup-straps. He led Mistah
Mule up beside a box, and from that he sprang into the saddle.

“Take good care of our boy!” the old horse Ebenezer warned Mistah Mule.
“Don’t you dare to hurt him!”

“I certainly aims to do just exactly what he says,” Mistah Mule
replied. And then, as Johnnie drew the bridle-reins tight, Mistah Mule
walked away.

“Well, well!” Ebenezer murmured. “Mistah Mule surely is improving. He’s
behaving better every day. I almost think I’m going to like him, after
all.”




X

MINDING TOO WELL


Johnnie Green rode Mistah Mule into the meadow. Mistah Mule seemed to
be, as Farmer Green had said, a fine saddle animal. He had an amble
that was as gentle as the sway of a rocking chair. His trot didn’t
jounce Johnnie a bit. He cantered delightfully.

Johnnie Green was greatly pleased with his mount. “I wish I owned him,”
he thought. “I wonder if Father would swap him for the Muley Cow.” The
Muley Cow belonged to Johnnie Green. She would have felt terribly if
she had known what was in his mind.

Mistah Mule soon proved himself a good jumper. He cleared the brook
easily. And then he scrambled up the bank and began to race down the
long gentle slope that stretched toward Cedar Swamp.

Now, Johnnie Green liked to ride at a gallop. Mistah Mule showed a
burst of speed that pleased him. But in a few moments it seemed to
Johnnie that Mistah Mule was traveling faster with every jump.

“He can’t be running away,” Johnnie muttered, as if trying to put out
of his head any notion that Mistah Mule might be doing that very thing.
And then Johnnie began to pull upon the reins. “Whoa!” he cried, not
meaning that he wanted Mistah Mule to stop, but only that he wished him
to gallop more slowly.

Well, Mistah Mule had promised the old horse Ebenezer that he would do
exactly as Johnnie Green said. So now, when his rider cried, “Whoa!” he
stiffened his legs and came down upon all fours instantly. He stopped
short. Nobody could say that he hadn’t obeyed Johnnie Green.

But Johnnie Green himself did not stop so quickly. On he went. He shot
along Mistah Mule’s neck, slipped over his head, in spite of a frantic
clutch at Mistah Mule’s ears, and sailed sprawling through the air.

Some distance in front of Mistah Mule, Johnnie Green struck the ground.
Though the grass was almost knee-high, Johnnie found his landing-place
far from soft. And while he lay there, gasping for breath, Mistah Mule
suddenly turned and trotted toward the farm buildings.

Johnnie struggled to his feet and ran after him. He tried to call out
to him to stop. But not a word could he utter.

There was a great flurry in the farmyard when Mistah Mule came home
with his saddle empty. Later, in the barn, the old horse Ebenezer spoke
to him very severely. But Mistah Mule declared that it wasn’t his fault
at all that Johnnie Green had been thrown.

“That boy,” he told Ebenezer, “he done say, ‘Whoa!’ An’ I whoaed!”




XI

TROUBLESOME MR. CROW


Though they both lived on the same farm, which belonged to Farmer
Green, Mistah Mule and the Muley Cow were not on speaking terms. The
Muley Cow had spent years there. She had seen so many queer strangers
come and go that she paid little heed to new arrivals unless she knew
that they were going to be what she called “permanent,” meaning that
they were there to stay.

Of course she began to hear about Mistah Mule, from the day when he
kicked Farmer Green. And she said then that Mistah Mule wouldn’t be
there long. She had such a poor opinion of him that she wouldn’t even
turn her head to look at the newcomer about whom all her friends were
talking.

“There he is! He’s the fellow that kicked Farmer Green,” the Muley
Cow’s neighbors would tell her. And they couldn’t understand why she
wasn’t interested.

At last, however, somebody said something to the Muley Cow that made
her both think and talk of very little except Mistah Mule. Up in the
hillside pasture old Mr. Crow settled down upon the fence near her.

“Good morning!” he cried. “How are you to-day? And how’s your cousin?”

“I’m quite well, thank you,” the Muley Cow replied. “But which cousin
do you mean? You know, half the herd is related to me. I have first
cousins, second cousins, third cousins, fourth cousins----”

“Yes! Yes!” Mr. Crow interrupted. “I don’t mean your _Cow_ cousins. I
mean Mistah Mule.”

“What?” exclaimed the Muley Cow with an angry toss of her hornless
head. “What? Sir! How dare you call that wretched creature my cousin?”

Old Mr. Crow chuckled. He loved to tease the Muley Cow.

“Well,” he replied, “there’s his name. ‘Mule’ and ‘Muley’ are a good
deal alike, aren’t they?”

“Perhaps! Perhaps!” spluttered the Muley Cow. “But this Mistah Mule and
I are not the least bit alike.”

“Well,” said old Mr. Crow with a grin, “there’s his tail.”

“What about his tail?” snapped the Muley Cow.

“It’s very much like yours,” Mr. Crow replied. “It’s a tufted tail.
It’s nothing like the old horse Ebenezer’s tail. If Mistah Mule’s tail
isn’t the same kind as yours, then I’m not a bird.”

By this time Mr. Crow had driven the Muley Cow almost frantic.

“I don’t care what sort of tail Mistah Mule has,” she declared.
“He certainly is no cousin of mine. He is not related to me, even
distantly.”

“Perhaps not!” said Mr. Crow. “Anyhow, I’ll see what Mistah Mule
himself says about that.”




XII

TWO BLACK RASCALS


Old Mr. Crow was in luck. He wanted to have a neighborly chat with
Mistah Mule. Not daring to fly inside the barn, he was a bit puzzled as
to how he could meet Mistah Mule. And then came the good luck. Farmer
Green turned Mistah Mule into the pasture.

From the top of a tall elm not far from the cornfield Mr. Crow spied
Mistah Mule cropping grass near the pasture bars. About half a minute
later Mr. Crow flopped down upon the topmost bar and called, “Good
morning, friend!”

Mistah Mule raised his head. He had never seen Mr. Crow before. But he
addressed him in a most familiar fashion. “Howdy, Jim!” he answered.

Old Mr. Crow choked. He hated to be called “Jim,” because it really was
his name, which he greatly disliked.

“Isn’t I met you before, down South?” Mistah Mule inquired.

“I hardly think so,” Mr. Crow replied. “I’ve been spending the winters
in the North for a good many years. I haven’t been South since I don’t
know when. And--er--when you speak to me, or of me, kindly omit the
‘Jim.’ Just say, ‘Mr. Crow.’”

Mistah Mule nodded. “I doesn’t blame you, not the leastest bit,” he
remarked. “I knows just how you feels.”

“We won’t talk about _that_ any more,” said Mr. Crow. “I came to talk
about an entirely different matter.”

“What’s that?” Mistah Mule inquired.

“Your tail!” Mr. Crow explained. “You know, it’s rather an odd one.”

Mistah Mule was so surprised that he turned his head and looked back at
his tail.

“I doesn’t see anything queer about it,” he murmured.

“Think hard!” Mr. Crow urged him. “Doesn’t it remind you of other tails
on this farm?”

“No, sah!” Mistah Mule declared.

“Hasn’t it occurred to you that your tail is somewhat like a Cow’s?”
Mr. Crow went on.

Mistah Mule was puzzled. He even seemed alarmed.

“This here is my own tail!” he cried. “Can’t nobody say I stole it.”

“Certainly not!” Mr. Crow agreed. “I’ll explain more carefully. There’s
a Cow on this farm that everybody calls ‘the Muley Cow.’ Just to tease
her, I want you to pretend you’re her cousin and that your two tails
are a good deal alike.”

“But I isn’t got two tails!” bellowed Mistah Mule. And again he turned
his head, as if to make sure that another tail hadn’t crept up behind
him, when he wasn’t looking.

“My goodness!” Mr. Crow muttered. “It’s hard to talk with this person.”




XIII

MISTAH MULE LAUGHS


Old Mr. Crow, at his very first meeting with Mistah Mule, decided that
he was somewhat stupid. When Mr. Crow spoke of the Muley Cow, and said
to Mistah Mule, “I want you to pretend that your two tails are alike,”
Mistah Mule actually didn’t know what the old gentleman was talking
about. He actually looked around to make sure he hadn’t two tails of
his own!

“Of course you haven’t two tails,” Mr. Crow told him. “I mean, _yours_
and _hers_.”

“Yes’m--yes, sah!” said Mistah Mule. “But how is I a-goin’ to pretend
that? If a fly lights on my back, does you ’spect the Muley Cow a-goin’
to swish it off with _her_ tail?”

“No! No! Certainly not!” cried old Mr. Crow.

“Yes’m--yes, sah! If a fly lights on the Muley Cow’s back, I’se a-goin’
to swish it off with _my_ tail.”

“No! No! My goodness, no!” exclaimed old Mr. Crow. “Listen to me. I’ll
explain carefully. I trust--” he added--“I trust it’s not necessary for
me to use words of one syllable.”

“One which?” Mistah Mule inquired, cocking a long ear towards Mr. Crow.

Mr. Crow paid no heed to the question. “I’ll put it this way,” he said:
“I want to have a little fun with the Muley Cow. I want to tease her a
bit. So when you meet her--as you’re sure to, if you stay here on the
farm--just say, ‘Good morning, madam! I see your tail is very much like
mine.’ Now you understand, don’t you?”

Mistah Mule scratched his head with one hind foot. Something still
puzzled him.

“How that a-goin’ to _tease_ her?” he asked. “’Pears to me it a-goin’
to _please_ her.”

“You think so?” Mr. Crow retorted with a sly smile. “Well, perhaps
you’re right. Try it, anyhow. And let me know what she says to you.”

Then Mr. Crow flew away towards the cornfield.

“Huh!” Mistah Mule grunted as he watched Mr. Crow growing smaller and
smaller in the distance. “That ole rascal, he a-tryin’ to git me into
trouble. That old Jim Crow, he think he’s mighty sly. But I reckon
maybe I kin play a trick or two my own self.” And Mistah Mule laughed
in his odd fashion, “Hee-haw! Hee-haw!”

’Way over in the cornfield Mr. Crow heard him. And the old gentleman
stopped right in the middle of a chuckle.

“I’d give an ear of corn,” he said aloud, “to know what he’s laughing
at.”




XIV

OBLIGING A LADY


Old Mr. Crow had said that the Muley Cow and Mistah Mule were sure to
meet, if Mistah Mule stayed at Farmer Green’s place. And they did.
One day Mistah Mule was pulling at a choice clump of clover, in the
pasture, when an elderly dame thrust her head over the stone wall
near-by, stared at him for a few seconds, swallowed her cud, and spoke.

“Good morning!” she called out. “Unless I’m mistaken, you’re the person
they’re all talking about. You’re Mistah Mule.”

“Yes’m!” Mistah Mule mumbled.

“Would you be so kind as to turn around for a moment?” the old lady
asked. “I’m the Muley Cow and I’d like to see your tail.”

“Yes’m!” Mistah Mule repeated, as he wheeled about.

“That will do, thank you!” the Muley Cow told him presently. “I wanted
to look at your tail. Old Mr. Crow told me it was a good deal like my
own.”

“Yes’m!” said Mistah Mule.

“So you agree with Mr. Crow!” exclaimed the Muley Cow quickly.

“No’m!”

“I’m glad to hear you say that,” the Muley Cow replied. “Your tail is
_not_ like mine. It has no beautiful curl dangling at the end of it,
like this one of mine.”

Mistah Mule walked up to the stone wall and laughed in his strange
fashion.

“That ole Crow, he try to make trouble for me an’ you,” he informed
the Muley Cow. “He say for me to tell you our tails is like enough to
be twins. But I says, that ole black scamp better do his errands his
own self. I has seen too many of his folkses down South, where I comes
from, to do what he tell me. I a-goin’ do just what he _don’t_ tell me!”

“Well! Well!” cried the Muley Cow. “You’re a person of some sense,
after all. You surprise me, sir. I had a very poor opinion of you, when
I heard that you had kicked Farmer Green.”

Mistah Mule looked very uneasy.

“I ain’t goin’ to do that no more,” he said. And he hung his head.

“You sent Johnnie Green flying, the first time he rode you,” the Muley
Cow went on. “I hope you won’t do that again, either.”

“No’m!” Mistah Mule murmured.

“You see, ma’am, I’se never lived ’mong kind people before. They
certainly has treated me fine on this farm.”

“I’m delighted to have met you--delighted!” cried the Muley Cow. “I
shall tell all my friends that you’re going to be on your best behavior
from this time on.”

“Yes’m!” said Mistah Mule. “So long as they doesn’t ask me to work!”

The Muley Cow smiled. She thought that was just one of Mistah Mule’s
jokes.




XV

TOO MANY QUESTIONS


From his favorite perch in the top of a tall elm old Mr. Crow saw
Mistah Mule and the Muley Cow talking together. He hurriedly gathered
a dozen of his friends, whom he found in the cornfield, and led them
in a headlong flight to the pasture. He had promised them good sport,
teasing the Muley Cow.

The crew of Crows found the Muley Cow in the shade of a maple tree,
chewing her cud.

“A--ahem!” said Mr. Crow to the old dame. “Did you have a pleasant chat
with Mistah Mule?”

“Very!” the Muley Cow replied. “I must say that I found Mistah Mule
quite gentlemanly, which is something I haven’t found _some of my
neighbors_.”

Her answer almost took Mr. Crow’s breath away.

“There’s a mistake somewhere,” he croaked, amid the loud laughter of
his friends. “I should like to know what Mistah Mule said to you.”

“He said something about you, Mr. Crow. But I’d rather not repeat it.”

Old Mr. Crow tried to make himself heard above the clamor of his
cronies, who were having a better time, even, than they had expected.

“That Mistah Mule is two-faced,” he declared. “I’m going straight to
him and ask him what he means by gossiping about me.”

“We’ll come too!” cried his friends.

He wished they would go away. But they all followed him as he sailed
over the hillside and settled down beside Mistah Mule.

“What did you say to the Muley Cow?” Mr. Crow demanded fiercely of that
dusky fellow.

“I done told her I didn’t ’spect to work none on this farm,” said
Mistah Mule with a grin.

“Ha! I can well believe that,” cried Mr. Crow. “And what else, pray,
did you say to her?”

“You mean, did I done say somethin’ ’bout a ole black rascal who thinks
hisself mighty smart?” Mistah Mule inquired mildly.

A chorus of loud caws greeted this question. And Mr. Crow flew into a
rage.

“There’s no use talking with this great clown,” he said to his
friends. “It’s impossible to converse with him.” And rising swiftly,
Mr. Crow tore off toward the woods. His friends followed him, jeering
boisterously. And Mistah Mule gave voice to a loud _hee-haw_, which
only made Mr. Crow fly the faster.

Mistah Mule stood still and watched his late callers straggle into the
cover of the tree-tops.

“I doesn’t look to see that old Crow ’round here agin in a hurry,” he
murmured.

“I certainly hope not!” said somebody in a squeaky tone, right at his
feet.

“My sakes! Who’s here?” Mistah Mule exclaimed.




XVI

ALL ABOUT GHOSTS


When Mistah Mule heard the tiny, squeaky voice, he didn’t know, at
first, who had spoken. He looked all around for some moments before he
spied two beady bright eyes peeping up at him from beneath a plantain
leaf.

“Sakes alive!” Mistah Mule exclaimed then. “I thought they was ghostses
’round here.”

“No!” said the small person who eyed him steadily. “I am not one of
those things. I am Master Meadow Mouse.”

“I hearn a voice but I didn’t see nobody,” Mistah Mule explained.
“That’s the way with ghostses. An’ if you sees ’em, you doesn’t hear
’em.” He shivered slightly as he spoke, although the weather was by no
means cold.

“Have you ever seen one?” Master Meadow Mouse asked him.

“N--no! Can’t say as I has,” answered Mistah Mule. “But my mammy, ’way
down South, she tell me all ’bout ’em.”

“I never heard of such things as ‘ghostses’ before,” said Master Meadow
Mouse. “But now I think I must have heard one about a minute ago. I was
asleep over there under that bush. And there was the queerest sound.
That’s what brought me here. I came to find out what it was.”

“Was it a dreadful, hollow noise?” Mistah Mule asked him.

“Yes! Yes!”

“Sound like somebody tormented?”

“Yes! Yes!”

Mr. Mule nodded wisely. “It certainly was a ghost,” he declared. “Queer
I didn’t notice it. I been right here quite a while. Kin you make a
noise like it?”

“I’ll try,” Master Meadow Mouse replied. And he gave a funny, squeaky
_hee-haw_!

“My goodness!” cried Mistah Mule. “That was my own self you done hear!
I was laughin’.”

“You were laughing?” Master Meadow Mouse exclaimed, as if he couldn’t
quite believe there was anybody, anywhere, that laughed in such a
terrible fashion.

“Uh--huh!” said Mistah Mule. “I done laugh at ole Jim Crow.”

“You must mean old Mr. Crow,” Master Meadow Mouse observed.

“Uh--huh!” said Mistah Mule once more.

Master Meadow Mouse knew that he meant “Yes!”




XVII

MINDING HIS MOTHER


“What’s your name?” Master Meadow Mouse asked Mistah Mule.

Mistah Mule told him.

“I shouldn’t think you’d dare to laugh when you’re alone,” Master
Meadow Mouse remarked.

“’Cause why?” inquired Mistah Mule.

“I should think the sound of your laugh would scare you terribly,”
Master Meadow Mouse explained. “And how awful, if--when you were
alone--you got to laughing and couldn’t stop!”

This remark so amused Mistah Mule that he couldn’t help laughing
again. And Master Meadow Mouse promptly tumbled right over backward.
He was sadly frightened. But he soon pulled himself together.

“Do you suppose,” he asked, “I could learn to make that sound? It
would be pleasant, when anybody chases you, to turn around quickly and
_hee-haw_ right in his face. It’s a fine way to frighten a person.”

“Keep a-tryin’ whenever you gits a chance,” Mistah Mule suggested.

Just then another little person came creeping through the grass. It was
Master Meadow Mouse’s mother.

“I’ll try it on her,” Master Meadow Mouse whispered. And scampering up
to his mother, he said in his tiny, squeaky voice, “_Hee-haw!_”

“There! You’re catching cold!” his mother exclaimed. “You sneezed.
Come right home and drink some hot ginger tea. You must wear your
rubbers when the dew is on the grass.”

“Excuse me, Ma! I was not sneezing. If you don’t believe me, you can
ask my friend here,” said Master Meadow Mouse.

“Friend! What friend?” his mother replied, looking in every direction
except up. She didn’t see Mistah Mule, who towered above her like a
mountain.

“Him!” said Master Meadow Mouse, pointing upward.

His mother raised her head. And when she beheld Mistah Mule she gave a
shrill scream.

“What monster is this?” she cried.

“He isn’t a monster. He’s Mistah Mule,” Master Meadow Mouse told her.

“Come away!” Mrs. Meadow Mouse begged her son. “It’s not safe to be so
near him. He could swallow you and me both at the same time.”

Of course Mistah Mule had never eaten a mouse of any sort. The good
lady’s fright amused him. “_Hee-haw! Hee-haw!_” he laughed.

“Run, child! Run!” Mrs. Meadow Mouse shrieked. And gathering up her
petticoats, she dashed for the nearest tree and squirmed her way down
among the roots, out of sight.

Meanwhile Master Meadow Mouse began galloping about Mistah Mule in a
circle. Watching his small new friend, Mistah Mule slowly turned round
and round in his tracks.

“What for you does that?” he inquired at last.

“My mother told me to run,” Master Meadow Mouse explained. “I always
try to mind my mother.”




XVIII

GOING FOR A DRIVE


Everybody on the farm agreed that Mistah Mule was growing better
natured. Even Farmer Green had to admit that Mistah Mule’s behavior had
improved.

One day Johnnie Green’s father wished to send his son to the village,
on an errand.

“I’m going to let you drive the mule,” he told Johnnie. “We’ll hitch
him to the light wagon. Here’s a letter to the store-keeper. He’ll give
you a part for the mowing-machine. Hurry right back with it.”

A few minutes later Mistah Mule trotted briskly out of the yard, with
Johnnie Green sitting very straight on the wagon-seat.

Now, in spite of his long ears and his odd tail, Mistah Mule had a
certain style about him. For all he was lazy, when he chose to behave
himself he moved his small, narrow feet in a smart way. And when he
trotted he raised his knees quite high, in a fashionable manner.
Moreover, he had a sleek black coat, which glistened in the sunshine.

Johnnie Green couldn’t help feeling rather proud as Mistah Mule went
down the road at a spanking trot.

“We’ll be back home long before Father expects us,” he thought.

Soon Mistah Mule’s feet were thumping over the great covered bridge
that crossed the river. And in a short time they began to climb the
long hill that rose from the valley. Beyond this hill lay the village.

Mistah Mule fell into a walk. A slow walk it was. The sun, beating down
upon Johnnie Green’s back, felt scorching hot. It beat down upon Mistah
Mule’s back, too. And he began to think that it would be foolish to
climb that mile-long hill ahead of him, dragging the wagon and Johnnie
Green behind him. His head drooped. His ears flopped back and forth
with every step. And at last he moved so slowly that Johnnie Green
spoke to him.

“Get along, there!” he cried, drawing the reins tighter.

Mistah Mule stopped short.

“Giddap! Giddap!” Johnnie shouted. “My goodness! I hope he isn’t going
to balk. Go on, there!” And he slapped Mistah Mule with the reins.

Mistah Mule laid back his ears, slowly turned his head, and stared at
Johnnie Green. There was no doubt that he had balked.

Johnnie didn’t know what to do. His father was waiting for that part
for the mowing-machine. And Johnnie hadn’t even reached the village yet.

He sat unhappily on the seat for a few minutes. And then he made up his
mind that he would do something. “I’m going to tie this old mule to a
tree and walk to the village and back,” he decided.

So he jumped from the wagon and tried to lead Mistah Mule out of the
road.

But that stubborn fellow wouldn’t stir.




XIX

THE RACE


Two hours passed. And Farmer Green began to stop his work now and then
and glance down the road.

“Johnnie ought to be coming along any minute now,” he said to the hired
man.

“He ought to, unless that mule has taken a notion to balk,” the hired
man replied.

“Oh! I don’t think he’ll do that,” said Farmer Green. “He hasn’t balked
for a long time.”

But when another hour had slipped by and Johnnie and Mistah Mule were
still missing, Farmer Green began to feel uneasy. So he hitched one of
the bays to a buggy. And away he went, down the road, with old dog Spot
racing along after him.

Spot kept carefully out of sight, beneath the buggy, until they reached
the bridge. Then he dashed out and begged for a ride. He knew that he
was too far from home for Farmer Green to send him back.

Farmer Green stopped the bay and told Spot to jump up. Then they
hurried on again.

“There they are!” Farmer Green exclaimed as the bay began to climb the
hill. “I was wrong. That mule can’t be trusted. I was foolish to think
he’d ever be any good.”

“Just what I’ve said all the time!” Spot barked sharply.

Johnnie Green heard him. He turned around and looked down the road.
Then he stood up in the wagon, waved his hat, and shouted.

And then--just because he was tired of standing there, and just because
he liked to do what people didn’t expect--Mistah Mule suddenly started
forward. Johnnie Green clutched at the wagon-seat to save himself from
a spill.

“Whoa!” he cried. But Mistah Mule paid no heed to that order. Seizing
the bit between his teeth, he broke into a smart trot.

“Whoa! Whoa! Whoa!” Johnnie yelled as he tugged at the reins.

“Ho! Ho! Ho!” Mistah Mule chuckled, as he went all the faster.

Meanwhile Farmer Green urged the bay up the hill. Just as they reached
the top he brought the bay’s nose even with the rear wheels of
Johnnie’s wagon.

“Stop him, Johnnie! Stop him!” he called.

“I--I--I can’t!” Johnnie answered as the wagon jolted over the stones.

Then his father tried to pass Johnnie, hoping to head off Mistah Mule.

But Mistah Mule would have none of that. He stretched his neck out and
tore down the hill like a trotter at the county fair. In a few moments
he had left the bay and Farmer Green far behind.

“Huh!” he grunted. “Thinks they kin pass me, does they?”




XX

THE LOAD OF HAY


If Mistah Mule hadn’t at last overtaken a load of hay in the road,
there’s no telling when he would have slackened his pace. It wasn’t
because Johnnie Green tugged on the reins and cried, “Whoa! Whoa!” that
Mistah Mule fell into a walk. No! It was because he wanted some of that
hay. He followed close behind the load, reaching forward now and then
to snatch a mouthful.

Though Mistah Mule was enjoying himself hugely, his driver, Johnnie
Green, was anything but happy. He felt almost as if he were stealing
hay himself. Of course, the driver ahead of him knew nothing of what
was going on behind his back. Perched far forward on his load, he could
see neither Mistah Mule nor Johnnie, nor even Farmer Green and the bay,
who soon caught up with the odd procession and plodded on at its rear.

So they finally reached the village. When the driver of the hay-wagon
drove upon the platform of the hay scales in front of the village
store, and stopped, Mistah Mule stopped too.

Farmer Green tied the bay to a post at the edge of the wooden sidewalk.
Then he did his errand at the store--the errand that Johnnie Green
would have done hours before, if Mistah Mule hadn’t balked on the hill.

When Farmer Green came out of the store he looked sharply at Mistah
Mule’s feet.

“He has lost a shoe,” he said. “I’ll drive him to the blacksmith’s
shop to have him shod. And I’ll leave you there, Johnnie, to come home
alone later, for I can’t wait. I ought to be in the hayfield this very
minute.”

When they reached the blacksmith’s shop Mistah Mule behaved
beautifully. As he stood with his halter-strap tied to an iron ring on
the wall, nobody noticed what he said to old dog Spot.

“They’s goin’ to be fun here,” Mistah Mule remarked.

“You’d better be good,” the old dog growled. “The blacksmith knows how
to handle rascals like you.”

Meanwhile Farmer Green was talking with the blacksmith himself.

“I can’t wait while you shoe my mule,” he explained. “If you’re gentle
with him I don’t believe he’ll make any trouble. He kicked when I
first brought him home. But he’s well-mannered enough now--except that
he balks once in a while.”

Farmer Green hadn’t been gone five minutes when Mistah Mule lashed out
with his heels and sent a tin pail crashing against a cobweb-covered
window.

Dodging the pail, Johnnie Green fell into a tub of water. The
blacksmith shouted at Mistah Mule. And old dog Spot barked noisily.

“A bee done ’lighted on me,” Mistah Mule remarked with a grin.




XXI

THE BLACKSMITH WINS


After kicking the pail in the blacksmith’s shop, Mistah Mule hung his
head low, closed his eyes, and pretended to fall asleep.

Johnnie Green, dripping from his plunge into the tub of water, when he
dodged the flying pail, looked at Mistah Mule with great disgust. And
so did old dog Spot. And so did the blacksmith himself.

“I don’t trust that fellow,” said the blacksmith.

“Nor I!” old Spot barked.

Mistah Mule opened one eye.

“They’s all ’fraid of me!” he chuckled. “This blacksmith, he better
take off his leather apron ’fore I tangle him up in it.”

“What’s that?” old Spot demanded.

“Just a-talkin’ to my own self!” said Mistah Mule. “You better run long
home, ole dog. You’s liable to git hurt if you stays ’round here. You
might git kicked right into the fire.”

Old dog Spot edged away a bit and tucked his tail between his legs. But
he didn’t intend to leave. He meant to see everything that happened. He
only hoped Johnnie Green would be safe.

Suddenly the blacksmith began to whistle a lively tune, quite as if he
hadn’t a care in the world.

“Bring the ropes!” he called to his helper, who looked just as strong
as the blacksmith, even if he wasn’t so tall.

In a jiffy they had wrapped several loops of rope about Mistah Mule’s
legs. He plunged and swayed. But the more he struggled, the tighter
the blacksmith and his helper pulled the ropes. Finally the blacksmith
untied Mistah Mule’s halter-strap. And soon Mistah Mule found himself
lying upon the floor of the smithy.

Old dog Spot began to wag his tail and prance about Mistah Mule.

“Now what are you going to do?” he yelped. “You made all those threats.
But the blacksmith is too smart for you. He’s got you where you can’t
move.”

Mistah Mule lay quite still. His eyes were closed. And something very
like a snore came from his soft nose. He made no sign that he had heard
what old dog Spot said.

Not until four handsome new shoes were nailed fast to Mistah Mule’s
feet did the blacksmith let him get up.

“I wish everybody on our farm had been here to see you shod,” old dog
Spot told him.

“An’ so does I!” Mistah Mule cried. “’Tain’t every day it takes two men
an’ a boy an’ a ole dog to shoe anybody in this smithy.”

Mistah Mule trotted briskly home with Johnnie Green and old dog Spot
together in the wagon. He never balked once. He knew there ought to be
a good dinner waiting for him in the barn; and he was hungry.




XXII

TURKEY PROUDFOOT


Mistah Mule was standing at the foot of the lane, near the barn. Near
him, Turkey Proudfoot was strutting about, looking for food now and
then, in the mud, and gobbling once in a while.

Suddenly Mistah Mule gave his odd laugh, “_Hee-haw!_” And when he heard
it, Turkey Proudfoot began to swell up, and dart his head toward Mistah
Mule, and raise his feet and then put them down in the same spot. He
was angry; he thought Mistah Mule was laughing at him. “What is there
about me that amuses you?” he cried.

Mistah Mule turned about with an air of great surprise.

“I didn’t know they was anyone here,” he replied. “I was just laughin’
at my own thoughts.”

“Do you mean to tell me that you haven’t noticed me here in this lane?”
Turkey Proudfoot demanded hotly. “Why, I was here when Farmer Green
turned you out of the barn!”

“I never knowed it,” Mistah Mule declared.

“Do you mean to say you haven’t heard my gobble?” Turkey Proudfoot
asked in a loud voice. “Why, I’ve gobbled a hundred times if I have
once.”

“I ain’t heard you,” said Mistah Mule with a grin.

Now, Turkey Proudfoot liked all the neighbors to notice him. He
wanted all the farmyard folk to admire his walk, his fine feathers,
his hideous voice. And when Mistah Mule told him that he hadn’t even
known he was anywhere around, Turkey Proudfoot grew angrier than ever.
If Mistah Mule had been a person of his own size, Turkey Proudfoot
would certainly have rushed at him, and fought him. But Mistah Mule
could have kicked him over the fence without half trying. And Turkey
Proudfoot knew it. There was nothing he could do except bluster. And he
could always do that without half trying.

“You’ve been on this farm quite a while now,” he gobbled loudly. “You
ought to know by this time that I’m a person of importance. When I go
out for a stroll, all the farmyard folk turn their heads and stare at
me.”

“Does they?” said Mistah Mule pleasantly. “What for does they do that?”

“My goodness!” Turkey Proudfoot exclaimed. “What a dull fellow you are!
Haven’t you any eyes? Haven’t you any ears?”

Mistah Mule had both eyes and ears--especially ears. But he claimed not
to know what Turkey Proudfoot meant.

“Haven’t you learned yet that I’m the ruler of the farmyard?” Turkey
Proudfoot asked him scornfully.

And at that, Mistah Mule gave voice to his queer _hee-haw_ once more.

“I was laughin’ at you that time,” he remarked.




XXIII

A PLAN GOES WRONG


Turkey Proudfoot was terribly angry when Mistah Mule laughed at him.

“Why did you do that?” he demanded.

“’Cause you thinks you’s the boss ’round here,” said Mistah Mule. “But
you has to do just as Farmer Green tells you.”

“I don’t believe you’ve ever seen me fight,” Turkey Proudfoot retorted.
“I can whip all the other gobblers on the farm.”

“Maybe! Maybe!” Mistah Mule replied. “But kin you whip Farmer Green?”

“Can you?” Turkey Proudfoot asked.

“I kin kick him plumb across the barn floor,” Mistah Mule chuckled.
“Kin you do that?”

Turkey Proudfoot knew that he couldn’t. But he wouldn’t actually say so.

“I could make Farmer Green _run_,” he remarked, “if only he would fight
fairly. But he won’t. He fights with a stick.”

“Sho!” Mistah Mule exclaimed. “Do he?” And then Mistah Mule hung his
head in thought. Soon he raised it again, however. And to Turkey
Proudfoot he began to say something in a low voice. Whatever it was,
Turkey Proudfoot did not seem to think well of it. He kept gobbling
protests and crying, “No! No! No!”

But in the end Mistah Mule won him over. For Turkey Proudfoot agreed to
do what Mistah Mule suggested.

“Good!” Mistah Mule brayed. “Do just as I tells you and you’ll make him
run sure.”

Then Turkey Proudfoot gave a run and a leap and a flap of his wings,
all of which carried him to the top of the fence and thence into the
farmyard. He began to strut back and forth between the house and the
barns, keeping a sharp eye upon the woodshed door.

In a little while Farmer Green appeared in the doorway, carrying a
pail, and started to walk to the pigpens.

Turkey Proudfoot gave a loud gobble and rushed at him. There was no
stick anywhere in sight which Farmer Green could snatch up. Turkey
Proudfoot had made sure of that.

“Go ’way, you old gobbler!” Farmer Green shouted.

But Turkey Proudfoot came on and on.

Farmer Green was carrying something in his pail. It was sour milk for
the pigs. And when Turkey Proudfoot was almost upon him, Farmer Green
showered the sour milk all over him.

The proud ruler of the farmyard turned tail and ran. He looked like a
white ghost as he scuttled, dripping, around a corner of the barn where
nobody could see him.

Mistah Mule had watched everything as he stood with his head over the
fence. And he again burst into his fiendish laughter.

“I reckon that ole Turkey done brag his last brag to me,” he chuckled.

Later, Turkey Proudfoot warned all the flock to have nothing to do with
Mistah Mule.

“He’s a trouble-maker,” declared Turkey Proudfoot.




XXIV

THE UMBRELLA


Johnnie Green wanted to go over the hill to play with a friend--a boy
called “Red.”

“You may go,” his mother said, “but you must take an umbrella. We’re
going to have rain.”

Now, Johnnie Green didn’t like to carry an umbrella.

“I don’t think it’s going to rain,” he grumbled. “I’ll ask Father if I
need to take one.”

“Your father has gone to the village,” Mrs. Green told him. “Maybe
you’d rather stay at home, anyhow.”

“Oh, no!” Johnnie exclaimed quickly. And snatching up his umbrella, he
slipped out of the door.

“I’m not going to walk ’way over the hill--not if I have to carry this
umbrella,” he muttered as soon as he was out of his mother’s hearing.

A few minutes later he was throwing his saddle on Mistah Mule. And then
he mounted him.

Mistah Mule cocked his eye at the closed umbrella in Johnnie Green’s
hand.

“What for this boy got that club?” he asked himself. “He better not hit
me with it.”

Once in the road, Johnnie urged Mistah Mule into a canter. He noticed
that dark clouds were fast gathering overhead. And white wisps of cloud
were beginning to whisk over the top of Blue Mountain.

“Giddap! Giddap!” he cried to Mistah Mule. “We want to get to Red’s
house before the storm breaks.”

They weren’t half way up the long hill when the wind began to whip the
tree-tops and a driving rain swept across the valley, pelting them with
great drops.

Johnnie Green fumbled with the strap of his umbrella. And then he
raised it, spread, over his head.

All at once a cyclone seemed to strike him. Mistah Mule plunged and
reared and bucked. Johnnie clung to the umbrella with one hand, to the
pommel of the saddle with the other. The umbrella turned wrong side
out at the very moment when the saddle-girth broke. And the next thing
Johnnie Green knew, he found himself sitting in the middle of the road,
in a puddle, holding the wrecked umbrella aloft.

Mistah Mule was standing a little distance away with his back to the
storm, hunched up, and with his head drooping.

Johnnie didn’t care to mount him again. With the soft mud sucking at
his feet with every step he took, he led Mistah Mule home.

“There was a cyclone for a few moments,” he told the family while he
dried himself in the kitchen.

Farmer Green had come home. And when he heard all of Johnnie’s story he
quickly guessed the truth of the matter. Mistah Mule liked umbrellas
even less than Johnnie Green.




XXV

BRIGHT AND BROAD


Mistah Mule was in the back pasture. The only other farm folk there
were Farmer Green’s oxen, Bright and Broad. They were a slow-going
pair. They always took plenty of time for anything they did. They
walked slowly, they lay down and got up slowly, they ate slowly, they
thought slowly, they talked slowly. And when they spoke, usually they
both said the same thing at the same time, in a sort of deep-toned
chant.

Mistah Mule was not pleased with his companions. He thought that Bright
and Broad were dull company. However, he had to talk with somebody,
for he dearly loved to wrangle. So he stayed near Bright and Broad a
good deal of the time.

Now, Bright and Broad were far from ashamed of being slow. On the
contrary, they prided themselves on their slowness.

“‘Slow but sure’ is our motto,” they remarked to Mistah Mule, speaking
together and wagging their great heads in exactly the same, slow
fashion.

“Huh!” grunted Mistah Mule, who--when he wasn’t ill--was always ready
to disagree with anybody, about anything. “You-all ain’t so slow as
what I is.”

Bright and Broad looked at each other and shook their heads. Then they
burst into a rumbling laugh: “Ho! Ho! Ho!”

“What for you scoffin’ at me?” Mistah Mule demanded.

“We’ve seen you run,” they told him. “You’re fast.”

“Prehaps! Prehaps!” Mistah Mule admitted. “But I kin be so slow, when I
_wants_ to be, that I doesn’t move a-tall.”

“Ho! Ho! Ho!” Again the great sides of Bright and Broad heaved with
laughter. “We know you’re sometimes balky. But it’s easy to balk. A
rock or a tree can do that. The question is, _how slowly can you walk
and not come to a halt_?”

“Slower’n what you-all kin!” Mistah Mule retorted.

“Ho! Ho! Ho! Pardon us! But we don’t think so,” Bright and Broad
replied. Bright winked very slowly at Broad; and Broad winked very
slowly at Bright.

Now, Mistah Mule was all for settling the dispute by talk. But Bright
and Broad told him that all the talking in the world couldn’t convince
them that they were wrong.

“There’s just one way to end the argument,” they told Mistah Mule. “And
that is to have a slow race.”

Although Mistah Mule didn’t know what they meant, he exclaimed that he
was ready for anything.

“I doesn’t keer,” he said, “what kind o’ race it is. I knows I kin win
it.”




XXVI

A QUEER KIND OF RACE


Bright and Broad, the oxen, were going to race against Mistah Mule in
the back pasture.

It was going to be a slow race. And since Mistah Mule hadn’t the
slightest idea what a slow race was, Bright and Broad started to
explain. As usual, they both began to speak the same words, at the same
time.

“The race,” they told Mistah Mule, “will be from the fence here to
the big pine tree on the other side of the pasture. We two will keep
together, just as we always do. We’ll all three start at once. If you
reach the pine tree first, you lose. If we reach it first, we lose.”

“Don’t nobody win this race?” Mistah Mule inquired.

“Yes! Yes! Whoever reaches the pine tree last will win.”

Mistah Mule shook his head.

“It’s one agin two,” he complained. “Don’t ’pear like it’s a fair race.
If one o’ you go too fast, the other kin hold him back.”

Bright and Broad swung their heads around and looked at each other
again.

“What do you suggest?” Broad inquired of Bright and Bright inquired of
Broad.

“Why not let him walk behind us?” each replied to the other.

“’Cause why?” Mistah Mule broke in.

“Don’t you see? It will be more than fair to you,” they explained. “So
long as you keep behind us, you’ll know that you aren’t going to reach
the pine tree until after we get there. Only, of course, you mustn’t
stop walking. If you find you can’t walk slowly enough, just swerve
aside and pass us.”

Mistah Mule quickly agreed to this plan. He couldn’t see, now, how he
could possibly lose the race.

“I hopes--” he remarked, as he took his place behind the oxen--“I hopes
you-all doesn’t kick.”

“Never!” they assured him. And each whispered to the other, “That’s
more than he can say about himself.”

“Are you ready?” Bright and Broad then boomed in their deep tones.

“Yes, sah! Yes, sah!” Mistah Mule replied. He answered twice, because
he was talking to them both, and he wanted to be polite.

“Go!” they bellowed. And each began very slowly to lift a foot off the
ground.

Mistah Mule suddenly forgot that this was to be a _slow_ race. When he
heard the word “Go!” he gave a great leap, which carried him between
Bright and Broad and thrust those heavy fellows rudely apart.

“Whoa, there!” they both cried. “Get back! If you must pass, go around
us.”




XXVII

A GOOD RACE SPOILED


The slow race across the back pasture had to be begun all over again.
At the word “Go!” Mistah Mule had forgotten that it wasn’t a _fast_
race. And he had plunged forward before he knew what he was doing.

After the second start he fell in behind the plodding oxen, Bright and
Broad. But he soon found that he couldn’t walk as slowly as they could.
First his nose nudged Bright. Then his nose nudged Broad.

“Stop that!” they both cried.

“’Scuse me!” said Mistah Mule. “Move a little spryer--can’t you?”

“Ha!” they chuckled. “We knew we could beat you at this game.” They
crowded against each other, so that Mistah Mule couldn’t wedge himself
between them. And there was nothing he could do except thrust his head
and neck alongside one of the pair. He chose Bright’s side.

Mistah Mule hadn’t taken six steps in this position when he gave a loud
snort. And then he flashed past Bright and Broad so quickly that they
looked as if they were moving backward.

“A bear!” Mistah Mule brayed. “Run! Run!”

“Ho! Ho! Ho!” laughed Bright and Broad. “See him run! This is just
a trick. He knows he can’t win the slow race fairly, so he’s trying
to get us to run ahead of him.” They nodded wisely as they trudged
towards the big pine tree, which marked the end of the race.

And then--all at once they sniffed, and asked each other a question:
“Do you notice a queer scent?” And like one ox they both looked around.

“A bear!” they both roared. And breaking into a lumbering gallop, they
hurried after Mistah Mule, who was already nearing the fence on the
other side of the pasture.

Quite breathless they reached the fence at last. But they were too
heavy and clumsy to jump over it, as Mistah Mule had already done.
Instead, they crashed their huge bodies against the fence and sent the
rails flying. Through the great gap that they had made they dashed side
by side. And they never stopped running until they reached the barn at
the foot of the lane.

Mistah Mule was waiting for them there.

“Somebody done win a race!” he brayed loudly.

Broad and Bright shot a glance of surprise at each other.

“But you ran much faster than we did!” they cried. “You can’t have won.”

“I isn’t said I winned it,” Mistah Mule retorted.

“Well, _we_ certainly didn’t,” that honest pair insisted. “We didn’t
even finish the race. We didn’t go near the pine tree.”

Mistah Mule laughed boisterously.

“Mistah Bear, he done win,” said Mistah Mule. “I looks back just once.
An’ there he am, right under the big pine his own self.”




XXVIII

UNEXPECTED HELP


Farmer Green had just had the bad luck to have a loaded wagon sink
hub-deep in a boggy place in the meadow, near the barnyard. The pair of
bays were harnessed to the wagon. And they couldn’t--or wouldn’t--pull
it out of the mire.

Farmer Green walked to the horse-barn, where his son Johnnie and the
hired man were working.

“The load is stuck fast in the mud,” he told them. “If Bright and Broad
weren’t ’way up in the back pasture they’d pull the wagon out. But it
would take a good hour to drive them down here.”

The oxen, Bright and Broad, were a famous pair. They were wonderfully
strong--and wonderfully slow, too.

“There’s old Ebenezer. You might hitch him in front of the bays,” the
hired man suggested.

Farmer Green shook his head.

“The old horse would pull until he dropped. I’m afraid he might hurt
himself,” he replied.

“Why don’t you use the mule?” cried Johnnie Green.

“I could _try_ him, I suppose,” said his father. “But I’m almost
certain he wouldn’t pull an ounce.”

“Oh, do try him, Pa!” Johnnie Green begged. When he wasn’t driving
Mistah Mule himself, Johnnie liked to see that stubborn fellow balk.

Both the old horse Ebenezer and Mistah Mule, who stood side by side in
the barn, pricked up their ears and listened to all this talk.

“Huh!” Mistah Mule grunted, as he cocked an eye at his neighbor. “They
needn’t think I’se a-goin’ to hurt myself a-pullin’ on their ole wagon.”

“I don’t blame you the least bit,” the old horse Ebenezer told him. “To
be sure, you’re a stout chap. Maybe you could yank the wagon out of the
hole--if the bays would pull too--without much trouble. But why should
you do that?”

It amazed Mistah Mule to hear such advice from old Ebenezer. And a very
stubborn look came over his face.

“I could twitch that wagon out quick--if I wanted to,” he declared.

“But you don’t want to,” said Ebenezer. “If you tried--and failed----”

“Don’t talk to me, ole hoss!” snapped Mistah Mule. “You got ’nuff to
’tend to if you only minds your own bus’ness.”

Old Ebenezer said no more. But he chuckled to himself when Farmer Green
came and led Mistah Mule away.

He chuckled again when Mistah Mule came back a little later, holding
his head very high.

“I showed ’em!” Mistah Mule brayed loudly. “I done pulled the load an’
those no-account bays too.”

Farmer Green told the hired man he was never so surprised in his life.


THE END




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Archaic or variant spelling has been retained.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALE OF MISTAH MULE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of A Resident's wife in Nigeria
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: A Resident's wife in Nigeria

Author: Constance Belcher Larymore

Release date: July 19, 2024 [eBook #74070]

Language: English

Original publication: United Kingdom: George Routledge & Sons, Limited, 1908

Credits: Peter Becker and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A RESIDENT'S WIFE IN NIGERIA ***






A RESIDENT’S WIFE IN NIGERIA

[Illustration]




                            A RESIDENT’S WIFE
                                IN NIGERIA

                                    By
                            CONSTANCE LARYMORE

              WITH FORTY-ONE ILLUSTRATIONS AND A PORTRAIT OF
                                THE AUTHOR

                              [Illustration]

                                  LONDON
                     GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS, LIMITED
                       NEW YORK: E. P. DUTTON & CO
                                   1908




Dedication


TO THE VERY BEST OF COMRADES AND FELLOW-TRAVELLERS

‘THE SAHIB’




Preface


In offering this little book to the public, I want to admit at once that
it is in no sense intended as a literary effort, but is merely a record,
gathered up from journals and notes of our everyday life and journeys
which have occupied the last five years.

My excuse for offering it is that I have been specially fortunate in
having opportunities and privileges of travelling about a little bit of
the world where few Englishmen have been; and though sorely handicapped
by very limited scientific knowledge, I have tried always to keep eyes
and ears open.

Only a short time ago, I read these words, written by a wise man, on this
very subject—

‘But the best way of travelling is to ride on a horse through country
where there are no railways, and no roads, and where, accordingly, the
people are rooted and untroubled in mind, and do as little work as they
can. Such travelling, it is not to be questioned, makes the best books.’

In the hope that he is right—for, as I have said, he is a wise man—I send
my little book forth, to take its chance. The last few chapters, I am
aware, should belong to a separate volume, and they were never intended
for publication in this form. But they are the outcome of _actual_
experience, and not generalizing from hearsay. Most of them, indeed,
were written originally in 1902, but they have been revised, corrected,
and corrected again, as time showed me my mistakes and failures. In
manuscript form they had been read by many of my friends who pronounced
them ‘good,’ and it is by their request that these chapters are included
here. It is to these friends that I offer my grateful thanks for the
majority and the best of my illustrations. I also have to acknowledge the
kindness of the Editors of _Chambers Journal_ and the _Pall Mall Gazette_
in permitting the reproduction of articles published by them at different
times.

                                                       CONSTANCE LARYMORE.




Contents


  CHAP.                                       PAGE

                    _PART I_

     I. SIERRA LEONE TO LOKOJA                   1

    II. ON TOUR                                 11

   III. BIDA AND EGGA                           25

    IV. KEFFI                                   47

     V. TREKKING NORTH                          61

    VI. KANO                                    73

   VII. KATĀGUM AND HADEIJA, AND BACK           85

  VIII. KABBA, SEMOLIKA AND PATTI ABAJA        111

    IX. BORGU                                  147

     X. BIDA                                   185

                    _PART II_

     I. THE HOME                               195

    II. THE HOUSEHOLD                          205

   III. DOGS, POULTRY AND COWS                 221

    IV. THE GARDEN                             239

     V. THE STABLE                             257

    VI. CAMP LIFE                              271

   VII. WHAT TO WEAR                           291




List of Illustrations


                                                               FACING PAGE

  Portrait of the Author                                     _Frontispiece_

  The Preperanda                                                         8

  Polo at Lokoja                                                         8

  Kuka (Baobab) Trees                                                   14

  A Hausa Beauty                                                        14

  The Emir escorting us into Bida                                       28

  Details of Gown Embroidery                                            28

  A Typical Hausa Gown                                                  32

  Trouser Embroidery                                                    32

  A Camp on the River Bank                                              40

  Roofing at Keffi                                                      40

  Native Drummers at Keffi                                              54

  A Detachment of the N. N. Regt.                                       54

  A Kano Street Scene                                                   76

  A Kano Mounted Messenger                                              76

  A Kano Caravan Donkey Driver                                          80

  Bringing in Fire-wood                                                104

  A Kano Doorway                                                       104

  Mureji—A Caravan about to cross the Niger                            112

  A Steam Canoe on the Niger                                           112

  The Emir’s Band, Bida                                                124

  My ‘Palm’ Cat (_Nandinia binotata_)                                  124

  ‘Fritz’                                                              152

  Our Start from Bussa for Illo                                        152

  Repairing the Bussa Residency                                        170

  Balu (Serval cat)                                                    170

  The Steel Canoe in which we descended the Bussa rapids               184

  The Tennis Court, Bida                                               184

  The Great Salla                                                      190

  The Prostration                                                      190

  My Writing Table                                                     198

  The Residency, Bida                                                  198

  ‘Amelia,’ a young Giraffe brought home by the late Captain
    Phillips, D.S.O.                                                   210

  ‘Chuku,’ a Native dog, rescued during the Aro-Chuku Expedition       210

  Our energetic D.S.C. training bullocks (Captain Burnside)            236

  Giant Sunflowers at Bussa                                            236

  Our Gardener at Play                                                 250

  ‘Jewel’ and ‘Brown Mouse’                                            250

  Mr. Lafone’s ‘White Mouse’                                           262

  Riding Astride—a locally made Skirt!                                 262

  One of our Camps                                                     274

  The Mail-Cart, Bida                                                  274




CHAPTER I

Sierra Leone to Lokoja


On the 10th of April, 1902, we left Sierra Leone, embarking on the
_Sekondi_ for Forcados, _en route_ to Northern Nigeria. We had spent
seven months in Sierra Leone, my husband doing duty with a company of
native gunners, and had grown to heartily dislike the place. In spite of
its undeniable beauty, it is the possessor of a most unpleasant climate,
and the impossibility of getting horse exercise, and the necessity of
continually ascending or descending steep hills, either on foot, or,
worse still, in a hammock, was most distasteful to us both after four
years of the free and active life of Indian military stations. So we
could not help looking upon our departure somewhat as a release, and
even bidding good-bye to our many kind friends did not entirely damp our
joy as we steamed out of the harbour and passed the lighthouse, gleaming
white amidst the luxuriant greenery and bright blue water, and set our
faces and thoughts towards Nigeria, and the life of a Resident there.

It certainly was a step in the darkest dark; no Englishwoman yet had
gone where I meant to go, or done what I hoped to do: we knew little
or nothing of the conditions of life before us except that it was
‘rough, _very_ rough!’ I had met only one official from Nigeria, and he
looked at me doubtfully and in silence when I announced my intention of
accompanying my husband, much as one regards a wretched scraggy-looking
screw, sometimes produced by an Irish horse-dealer, with confident
asseverations as to his qualities as a hunter—and yet, the ‘screw’
scrambles along fairly all right sometimes! One of my friends in Sierra
Leone—having visited Accra—felt qualified to speak, and, in endeavouring
to dissuade us from this rash venture, assured me that ‘Nigeria was just
like Accra—not a tree, not a blade of grass anywhere!!’ (This is quoted
with apologies to Accra!) I have often smiled to myself over that pithy
saying, while marching through magnificent forests, and miles of open,
grassy, park-like country! Luckily, I still permitted myself to hope
for trees and grass, and felt that my four years in India, and some
experience of camping in Kashmir, would, at all events, prove to have
been a useful education, and seven months in Sierra Leone could leave one
few surprises in the shape of an unpleasant climate.

On the _Sekondi_ we were fortunate to find an old friend of Indian days,
Captain Ashburnham of the 60th Rifles, also faring forth to Nigeria for
the first time, to serve with the W.A.F.F. or, as it is called there,
the Northern Nigeria Regiment. He was armed with valuable experience,
learnt from the South African War and life in Uganda, and many were the
talks we had, and the plans we made, sitting under the awning, on the
deck, while the _Sekondi_ rolled her way south.

One of our fellow-passengers had already been to Nigeria, but I think
he had outlived his enthusiasms a little, and possibly thought me an
unlikely specimen to survive among ‘the fittest,’ for he responded but
little to my tiresome curiosity, while the ship’s officers were unanimous
in headshaking and mournful prophecies, judging Nigeria generally by
their own cursory stay at Burutu, and cheerfully promising to convey
me home ‘next trip’—_if_ I should be above ground to be conveyed! At
table I sat next to a Lagos official, who proved himself a real friend,
and I have never ceased to be grateful to him for his encouragement and
cheerful prognostications, at a time when I sorely needed them. Mr.
Stone’s work at Lagos—that of road construction—lay entirely amongst the
up-country natives, and he would tell me a thousand anecdotes of their
simple kindly ways, courteous hospitality, and child-like interest in
white people—prophesying that I should be friends with them at once, and,
if anything, get rather spoilt amongst them—a forecast which has been
amply fulfilled since.

The trip was an uneventful one, though not the pleasantest I have made
down the Coast: the sole occurrence of interest that I can recall
was that we lost one of our boats overboard during the night, and
the following morning, when the loss was discovered, we turned back
and sought the open seas for the derelict—and found it! A couple of
stalwart Kru-boys were despatched overboard, and swam to the boat, only
to find there were neither oars nor paddles inside, and they presented
a comically helpless spectacle, sitting in the boat, and frantically
endeavouring to paddle with their hands! They had to do another swim, to
possess themselves of the paddles thrown from the ship before they could
bring their prize alongside. And so on—by day, sunshine, sapphire water,
the fringe of low grey coast-line, which never loses its fascination for
me, by night, glorious stars and an infant moon, and—night and day alike,
the monotonous, infinitely soothing roll of the ship, as the huge swell
swept shorewards, to break itself in thundering surf, away by the grey
palm-trees and the yellow sand.

We left the _Sekondi_ outside the bar at Forcados, transhipped ourselves
and our belongings to the ‘branch boat,’ a small steamer of light draft,
and spent four or five weary hot hours crossing the bar and finding our
way up to Burutu. Here we were most kindly and hospitably received by
the Marine Superintendent, who gave me a most welcome cup of tea, and
assisted us to arrange ourselves on the _Karonga_, one of the Government
stern-wheelers, which travel up and down the Niger, carrying mails and
passengers. These little boats consist of an upper and lower deck,
the latter loaded with cargo, fuel and native passengers, the former
reserved for European travellers, and though, nowadays, they boast of
regular cabins, when I first made the acquaintance of the _Karonga_ the
after part of the deck was merely divided off into partitions by canvas
screens, an arrangement which I still prefer to a stuffy cabin! At Burutu
we bought stores, etc., for the up-river trip, and as we had brought
a couple of native servants from Sierra Leone, we shook down quite
comfortably.

That evening we dined on board the _Jebba_, which was lying at Burutu,
and, later, embarked on our little stern-wheeler, and set out on our
river journey, under a full moon, threading our way along one of the
labyrinths of creeks—a liquid silver path, walled on each side with
straight lines of mangroves, dense black shadows, and weird, bare white
roots and stems—a scene suggestive of mystery, and full of a strange
beauty of its own.

I enjoyed every day of that trip; we were a cheery party, and all
prepared to make the best of life: as we left the Delta behind, the
country became more diversified, little villages appeared on the banks
and we were surrounded by tiny canoes, the occupants of which, boys and
girls, clamoured loudly in greeting, and fierce competition ensued over
the empty tins and bottles flung to them.

The second evening we were destined to discover the weak points of the
_Karonga_; the rain came down in torrents, poured through the roof
of the deck in vigorous streams, soaking beds and bedding in five
minutes. We stripped our beds, and sat patiently, watching the water
dripping steadily on the bare canvas, till, in sheer weariness, we
rolled ourselves up in mackintoshes, rigged waterproof sheets on top of
the mosquito nets, and slept soundly in spite of wet pillows and the
prevailing drippiness!

In the morning, however, hot sunshine turned our sorrow into joy—every
available space was employed for the drying of wet blankets and clothing,
and, with all our gloom dispersed, Captain Ashburnham and I mixed the
dough, and treated ourselves to hot scones for breakfast!

We arrived at Lokoja rather late one evening, and after sleeping that
night on the _Karonga_, the next morning we were most kindly taken in
charge by Mr. Gollan, then Chief Justice, who was temporarily filling the
place of the last Resident, just invalided home. Mr. Gollan escorted us
to our quarters, a massively built double-storeyed stone house, known as
the ‘Preperanda,’ which had previously been the Mess-house of the N.N.
Regiment, but was now in a very bad state of repair. The rooms below
were used as offices, and those above as a dwelling-house. The verandah
was in a ruinous condition, and most of the glass had vanished from the
doors and windows; even the shutters had fallen off, so that, when the
tornadoes came, as they did with annoying frequency, salvation lay in one
direction only, to collect _all_ one’s belongings in frantic haste in a
heap in the centre of the floor, cover them with waterproof sheets, and
sit firmly on them till the storm had spent itself, when the floor could
be mopped up, and books, pictures, etc., returned to their places.

Still, I have always loved the Preperanda: it was almost buried in
trees, gorgeous scarlet ‘flamboyant’ (_Poinciana Regia_), red and yellow
acacias, deliciously scented frangipani, both white and pink, huge bushes
of rosy oleanders, lime-trees, mangoes, orange-trees and guavas: leaning
over the verandah railing in the fragrant soft darkness, I then and there
took to heart the lesson which I have tried to practise ever since—the
absolute _duty_ of planting trees everywhere for the benefit of one’s
successors.

At the Preperanda, I began to study the art of Nigerian housekeeping, and
forthwith engaged a cook, a most unprepossessing looking individual, a
Kru-boy, rejoicing in the name of Jim Dow; he proved an excellent cook,
as they go in West Africa, but a frail vessel where intoxicants were
concerned; nevertheless, he did us good service for three years in many
places, was untiring on the march, and, in the main, sober. The further
knowledge I acquired on this all-important subject I have gathered
together in a later chapter for the sake of convenience.

Our first month in Lokoja was, in many ways, a busy one; my husband had
his hands only too full of official work, we bought a couple of ponies,
and I set to work to organize a stable, realizing sadly in a day or two
that the amenities and conveniences of Indian life were not to be found
here, any more than inside the house. We made friends, too, with the
small community of white people in the station, the nursing sisters,
N.N.R. officers and civilian officials, and many were the helping hands
and kindly hints given to us, on all sides, and most gratefully received.

Lokoja is placed most picturesquely on a strip of level ground, encircled
by hills and the Niger. Above the native town towers the Patti Hill,
a flat-topped mountain some eight hundred feet high, on the summit of
which, originally, there was a town and many acres of cultivation. The
town has vanished, but traces of old farms can easily be seen, and the
former occupiers are, even now, anxious to return to their perch and
build a new village. They seem to have a high opinion of the soil up
there, and we have often wished that the English community might be able
to form a new station on that breezy hill-top instead of grilling down
by the river bank. Perhaps it may come to pass some day, for the present
Cantonment is, most unfortunately, down-stream from the native town.

[Illustration: THE PREPERANDA (p. 7)]

[Illustration: POLO AT LOKOJA (p. 9)]

I often wonder whether any one who had not seen the place for ten years
or so would be able to recognize it to-day! The change, even since I have
known it, has been amazing. When we landed there, five years ago, the
‘Civil Lines’ consisted of a straggling row of bungalows, rejoicing in
the significant appellation of ‘Blackwater Crescent’! In front stretched
a waste of swampy ground, thickly covered with coarse, rank grass.

To-day, with its numbers of neat bungalows, well-tended little gardens,
the swamp drained and converted into a recreation ground, containing
tennis-courts, cricket-pitch, etc., good roads, and flowering trees and
hedges, it is as pretty a little cantonment as one could wish to see, and
the view from the hills behind is extremely beautiful—the two rivers,
Niger and Benue meeting just below the cantonment, winding down to the
confluence like two silver ribbons, visible for miles up river.

The 2nd Battalion of the N.N.R. are quartered in Lokoja, with a company
of native gunners, and we still call their lines ‘the camp’—a survival of
the days when the soldiers existed in wretched discomfort, under canvas.
Behind the camp is the polo ground, and, on the farthest ridge, the new
hospital is prominent, with the Sisters’ bungalow, and medical officers’
quarters. Personally, I have always thought Lokoja a far prettier and
pleasanter place than Zungeru, the new headquarters, but comparisons are
ever ungracious, and lasting impressions of places—to me—depend so much
on associations, that Lokoja has always been more of a ‘home’ than a
‘headquarters’ to me. I have always been sorry to leave it, and always
glad and contented to see it again.




CHAPTER II

On Tour


Exactly a month after our arrival, we set forth on our first tour in the
‘bush.’ The object of our journey was the delimitation of the Northern
Nigeria-Lagos boundary, from Aiede to Owo, and at the former place we
were to meet the Lagos Travelling Commissioner.

We made our preparations mostly by the light of our Kashmir camping
experience, for, beyond generalities, none of my friends in Lokoja—with
the best will in the world—could help me very much, never yet having had
such a problem to tackle! Indeed, I think, had they advised me frankly,
they would have said, ‘Don’t go!’ and they were quite wise and kind
enough to refrain from saying that!

So, on the 28th of May, we rode leisurely out of Lokoja, about four
o’clock, having decided on a short march for the first day—a very sound
precaution, on which we have acted ever since. We jogged down to the Mimi
River, on the far side of which our camp was arranged, the carriers and
servants having been sent on ahead, so that everything was ready for us
in the little ‘rest-house’ (a thatched shelter, innocent of walls), hot
baths announced, and dinner preparing.

Things were not exactly ship-shape that night—they never are at a first
halt—and the sandflies and mosquitoes gave us a bad time; but, all the
same, we were _very_ happy at being out in camp, with a good six weeks
before us, to be crammed with novel experiences, new flowers, new birds,
new butterflies to discover, heaps to learn about everything, and no
drawbacks, saving a little physical discomfort, a comparatively trifling
matter to energetic inquisitive folks like ourselves.

‘A rare holiday’ we said, and so it proved itself, amply!

The next morning we were off early, and rode along through lovely
park-like country, wide stretches of grass, picturesquely dotted with
clumps of palms and light bushes, crossed by streams the courses of
which are marked by a broad band of thick luxuriant foliage—like a dark
green ribbon lying across the sunny plain of grass. I made delighted
acquaintance with the Gloriosa Superba lily, not the magnificent apricot
yellow climbing variety, but a more delicately regal one, with glowing
crimson petals edged with gold, standing up among the grass, slender,
tall and graceful. That night we had heavy rain, but our rest-house,
mercifully, was watertight and very cosy, and we smiled contentedly, and
promised ourselves a cool march for the morrow. And so we had:—it was a
perfect day full of joyful discoveries, climbing beside the narrow path,
like a sheet of flame, was _Mussaenda Elegans_ in full bloom, two furry
grey monkeys sitting solemnly on a rock, birds of wonderful blue, crimson
and yellow, some scarcely larger than beetles, a tiny village tucked
away at the foot of a little round hill, and, later, when we climbed
the Shokko-Shokko hill, great clumps of pure white lilies, the bulbs of
which were the size of a man’s head, as I discovered, when, afterwards,
I bore one back in triumph to Lokoja. At Shokko-Shokko we celebrated my
birthday with a dinner-party of two, and I cannot recall a cheerier or
more light-hearted birthday in my life!

The following day, I had my first view of forest country: I had listened
so often to my husband’s descriptions of the Ashanti forests and their
dreary monotony, and I was ready to cry out to him that it was, after
all, the loveliest thing in the world—though, later on, I quite came
round to his opinion!

It is a rather specially beautiful piece of forest round Oduapi; the
sunshine filters down pleasantly through the branches of huge trees and
swinging creepers, on the thick undergrowth of bushes and ferns; there
are acres and acres of pineapples, the smell of them rather overpowering,
for they are such prickly souls that the natives gather only those which
grow close to the path, while the rest rot in their hundreds; but the
sickening scent attracts perfectly splendid butterflies—positive _coveys_
of them, of all shapes, sizes and colours.

We passed a tiny farm, belonging to an ex-soldier, a Hausa; he and his
family work the little homestead, and the acres increase year by year,
I am glad to say! On this first visit he and his wife came out to greet
us, and, with the simplest kindly hospitality, offered us of their
best—kola-nuts and wild honey, both of which I ate on the spot, to their
great delight. The honey was rather a problem, on a fidgety pony, with a
twig for a fork!

The Chief of Oduapi, a most cheery old gentleman, with a loud and jovial
laugh, came out to meet us, accompanied by his ‘suite,’ and I tried hard
not to laugh—the caparisoned steeds were so quaint, and still more so
their riders, picturesque in flowing gowns, made of velvet, originally
of loud gaudy colours, but softened by time and exposure to perfectly
artistic tones. Oduapi’s gown is always a delight to me, the blue has
become the blue of Gobelin, and the green the softest of sage tints.
Their dignity was sadly impaired by the head-dress of huge flapping straw
Hausa hats, with leather strings—now perching rakishly, now pressed down,
granny-wise, now flapping wildly half-way down the rider’s back, as his
pony plunged and reared.

[Illustration: ‘KUKA’ (BAOBAB) TREES. (p. 14)]

[Illustration: A HAUSA BEAUTY. (p. 19)]

The rest-house at Oduapi is placed in a clearing in the forest—a lovely
spot, with troops of little grey monkeys chattering and swinging in
the trees, the undergrowth alive with birds and butterflies, and an
occasional ‘ough, ough,’ betraying the whereabouts of the larger
dog-faced monkeys, who, however, did not show themselves, though they
seemed to resent our intrusion.

That night, I woke suddenly, listening intently, to hear, for the first
time, the roar of a lion. It was a very awe-inspiring sound, echoing
again and again in the depths of the silent forest, followed by a deep
hoarse cough, and made one, for the moment, consider our thatched shelter
somewhat inadequate! However, we had a fire burning outside, and,
remembering the saying that no lion will tackle a mosquito curtain (and,
further, being _very_ sleepy!), I merely took the precaution of lifting
Timmie, our Irish terrier, on to my bed, and slept placidly till dawn.

After a hot march, we reached Kabba, and though we were most kindly
received by the officer commanding the detachment there we found the
ruinous tumble-down ‘fort’ so uncomfortable that we were glad to leave
again. Afterwards, I saw a good deal more of Kabba, and learnt to love
it, and think it far the most beautiful spot I have seen in Northern
Nigeria. At Lukpa, where the village nestles away among the trees, and
the rest-house is set on a hill with magnificent views all round, an
incident occurred which is worth describing in detail, for it ‘gives one
furiously to think’!

‘The Sahib’—as, from ineradicable Indian habit I still commonly call my
husband—had gone out at sunset, after deer, and, during his absence,
the entire population of the village came streaming up the hill to the
rest-house, all talking loudly and at once, and evidently under the
influence of strong excitement. I was, by that time, well accustomed to
creating a sensation wherever I appeared, no white woman having been seen
previously; but these people struck me as having more than salutations
in their minds and on their clamouring tongues. I had been six weeks in
the country, my knowledge of Hausa was confined to salutations and a
few simple words, so I summoned our interpreter to help me to entertain
my visitors. They chattered, shouted and gesticulated at ‘Paul,’ who
eventually explained to me, smilingly, that they had never seen a white
woman before, and were anxious to offer me a personal welcome. I nodded
and smiled in high gratification, thanked them cordially, and, when I
had exhausted my small stock of polite salutations, told the interpreter
to give them leave to go home. This they did, somewhat reluctantly,
I thought; but after describing the interview with some amusement to
the Sahib, I dismissed the matter from my mind. Six weeks later we
passed through Lukpa again, on our way back to Lokoja, and found it
_deserted_—not a man, woman or child, not a goat, not a fowl—all gone,
obviously fled into the bush! I felt distinctly hurt at this churlish
behaviour on the part of my late admirers, and learnt, long afterwards,
that, on our first visit, our precious interpreter and others of our
party had _seized and killed every goat and fowl in the village_! The
wretched owners had rushed up to the rest-house to complain and implore
protection, and all they got was: ‘Thank you! Thank you! Yes, that’s all
right! You can go home now!’ I am not ashamed to confess that I _cried_
when I made that discovery! The lesson, however, went home to us both,
and drove us to work ceaselessly at the Hausa language, knowing there
could be no security for ourselves, or justice for the people, until we
could be independent of dishonest interpretation.

At Ekiurin, we pitched our tent under a great shady tree in the centre of
the village, and strolled about in the cool of the evening, finding large
plantations of scarlet and yellow Cannas, the seeds of which are pierced
and threaded into Mahomedan rosaries. As a great mark of confidence, I
was shown the interior of the ‘Ju-ju house,’ and was as disappointed as
one usually is at the unravelling of a mystery! The shrine consisted of
a dark, empty room, swept very clean, the walls were roughly coloured
red, and on one was drawn an unshapely, meaningless figure, executed,
apparently, in white chalk. In the verandah, another reddened wall
was decorated with similar designs, and in a prominent place was the
sacrificial stone, black and roughly carved. In a niche in the wall
stood a carved wooden figure, some eighteen inches high, hideous and
much blackened with exposure and nasty gory smears, caused, however, by
nothing less innocent than the blood of an occasional fowl.

And so on to Aiede—the country alternating between grass-land and forest.
I found precious trophies in the shape of terrestrial orchids, varying
in hue from palest mauve to deepest purple, with delicate reddish-brown
stems, and growing about three feet high. There were yellow ones and
some were green, all most wonderfully striped, spotted and splashed with
contrasting colours.

Very prominent features of the Nigerian landscape are the red ant
hills, sometimes attaining a great height, and most fantastic in shape
and appearance. They remind me of a story told of a gallant officer,
more zealous than comprehending, who was engaged in quelling a petty
disturbance in West Africa. This hero, spying one of these queer-looking
clay erections, took it to be a ‘heathen fetish,’ and, plunging his sword
through and through the imaginary idol, exclaimed to the astonished
villagers and his troops: ‘Thus does the Great White Queen destroy the
Black Man’s Ju-ju!’ The villagers, of course, thought him mad, but were
too polite to say so, and the native soldiers must have smiled!

At one small village I created a painful impression, apparently; the
headmen, who came to the usual interview, lay on the ground, their heads
wrapped tightly in their gowns, and groaned aloud, in abject fear, and
no persuasion could induce them to speak or look up till I retired from
the scene! The scare subsided happily, before we left, and they recorded
their opinion that I had come straight from Heaven, and besought me not
to permit it to rain for a day or two. I could but hope for the best, and
felt relieved when we got away without a shower!

The roads, or rather tracks, were terribly bad going when rain caught
us on the march; we crossed mountains, stumbling along among masses of
rock, loose boulders and slippery clay, on foot, of course, riding being
out of the question, and our hearts ached for our plucky little ponies,
labouring and clambering up—the descent in each case being worse and more
dangerous. They were indeed ‘as active as monkeys and as clever as cats.’
On the return journey we tied putties on their knees to save them in case
of a slip, and felt much happier.

Aiede is a straggling, rather dilapidated Yoruba town; it looked
pretty, as there is any amount of vegetation, bright sunshine and cool
shade, but the prevailing smells are atrocious, and the people most
unattractive. They are Yorubas, but appear to be exceptionally lazy
and idle, ignorant and fetish-ridden. Strictly ‘on the quiet,’ I was
taken to see the Ju-ju stone, hidden away inside a circular enclosure:
a large rock against which was propped a roughly carved wooden image,
very ugly, smeared all over with blood, feathers, etc., as was also the
ground. I was told that a sacrifice (of a goat or a fowl) is made there
every morning, so that the image may be ‘watered with blood’; there were
indications of special oblations having been made—possibly on our account!

A compound was pointed out to me as the dwelling of their ‘Ju-ju woman,’
described as ‘white,’ held by the Aiede folks in great reverence; many
sacrifices of dogs are made to her, as she has a particular fancy for
eating them! My Irish terrier ran fearlessly in, and, lest he should get
his throat cut, I rushed in after him, and came face to face with the
old lady. She was a loathsome object, an albino negress, with snow-white
hair, skin of a horrible blanched colour, and a terrible pair of red
eyes. Her astonishment at the sight of me was quite ludicrous; she may
have considered me as a possible rival, about to set up in her line of
business! The Lagos Travelling Commissioner, who we met at Aiede, seemed
to have grave suspicions of the people there in the matter of twin-murder
and human sacrifices—they certainly looked capable of both.

Part of the road from Aiede to Alashigidi was declared impassable for the
ponies, so we sent them round by a longer road and did the eight miles on
foot. It was rather a pleasant variety, and included some rough climbing,
after which I was made acquainted with palm wine; it was icy cold and
quite fresh, and seemed to us delicious, but I suppose we were very
thirsty, for it has never seemed so good, to me, since.

After leaving Alashigidi, the country was dense forest, damp, gloomy and
utterly monotonous, only compensated for by the magnificent butterflies.
We succeeded in capturing a good many, especially of a kind that was, at
that time, new to me—a truly beautiful person, with glorious colouring,
the wings quite iridescent, appearing in one light, pale green, in
another deep glowing purple, in another shimmering white, with a general
effect of mother-of-pearl. Along the banks of the Osé River a rough path
was blazed, to mark the boundary line, and we made an expedition along it
on foot. It was a very interesting experience, penetrating this silent
forest, where no human being had passed before, and delightful to notice
how utterly fearless were the birds and butterflies, scarcely moving
at our approach. The men who hacked out the path for us had immense
difficulty in inducing a large python to ‘move on’—he had to be actually
burnt out before he would remove himself! The river itself was very
lovely, cool and silent in deepest shade, winding noiselessly through the
forest. Our objective was Iporo, a little standing camp, composed of much
dilapidated grass huts in a clearing, on the banks of a stream, really
tinkling and purling exactly like a Scotch burn, and which I flew to
sketch on the spot!

The following morning we started back on our long return journey, passing
from Alashigidi to Erun, where we spent what should have been Coronation
Day. On the strength of this, we decided to hold a _durbar_ of our own,
congratulating ourselves on being far from the crowded streets of London,
and all unconscious of the tragic shadow then hanging over England, while
the King lay dangerously ill.

A number of Chiefs came in from the surrounding villages, to pay their
respects, all arrayed in their bravest attire, and a very gaudy crowd
they were! Erun himself was arrayed in a garment composed of stripes of
crimson and gold plush, embroidered on the breast with gold and sequins;
over this was worn a long mantle of silver grey plush—it made my heart
ache to see its delicate folds trailing in the dust! On his head was a
comical high hat, shaped like a Bishop’s mitre, made entirely of white
and coloured beads; from it, all round, hung a long, thick fringe
of beads, thoroughly concealing his face. This original costume was
completed by a necklace of coral, huge slippers, also of bead-work, and a
staff completely covered with beads in intricate patterns, surmounted by
a bead dicky-bird!

He sat, with immense dignity, under a crimson and gold State umbrella,
with the other Chiefs arranged in a semicircle, strictly according to
precedence, making a brilliant splash of colour with their robes of blue,
purple and green velvet and brocade.

While my husband explained carefully to them why the day had a special
significance for us all, and described what we imagined to be going on at
Westminster, I whiled away the time by making a sketch of the old Chief,
and took some photographs, but found our guests most fidgety folks to
get into a group—at the critical moment some one was sure to get up and
stroll away, or lean across to make a remark to his neighbour!

In the evening, rather to our dismay, they all turned up again, singly
this time, and gave us a good deal of useful information. Before each
other they would say nothing, this being a matter of etiquette, but, in
private, were brimful of troubles, complaints and general talk.

From Erun we made our way back to Kabba, coming in for quantities of
rain, but usually at night, so we had little real inconvenience from
it, except in the matter of fording swollen streams. On one of these
occasions, crawling cautiously into the river, the ponies suddenly
dropped out of their depth, and were obliged to swim for it. It was
decidedly uncomfortable for ponies and riders, but the good little souls
made a valiant struggle against the rushing current, and landed us safe,
though wet, on the far side. The worst part of that business was the
struggle to get off my dripping boots!

We were delighted to leave the stuffy forest behind, and find ourselves
back in the fresh air and breezes of Kabba. It was an uneventful march,
my chief concern the catching of butterflies. We got one or two fine
“Charaxes,” and greatly exercised ourselves over the moths that thronged
the sweet-scented blossoms of the paw-paw trees at night.

We got back to Lokoja about the middle of July, having thoroughly enjoyed
our _trek_, and, myself, feeling very pleased with my initiation into the
methods of African travel.




CHAPTER III

Bida and Egga


We spent the rest of July and August in Lokoja—my husband, as usual, full
of work; I, very busy gardening. We watched the building of the bungalow
destined for us, and, as soon as the actual building was finished, we
set to work, and made our garden, having the coarse elephant grass dug
out, and turfy ‘dhoob’ grass planted instead. Numberless seedlings and
cuttings were put in, dotted over the grass; we had scarcely one failure,
and my seedlings are now respectable sized trees!

But trouble overtook us too—our dearly-loved little Irish terrier
sickened and died, as did also my pony, ‘Mouse,’ who had carried me so
gallantly over all those miles we had travelled. Both losses, I imagine,
were the result of that ‘beautiful forest country.’

About this time the High Commissioner arrived, bringing Lady Lugard;
they paid Lokoja a short visit before going on to Zungeru, and the real
Coronation Day was celebrated. In the middle of August we moved into our
new bungalow, and, for me, naturally, the days flew until the beginning
of September.

My husband was very anxious to meet and confer with the Resident of Nupe,
who was less able to leave his headquarters at the time than we were,
and, as we were nothing loth to extend our acquaintance with Nigeria, we
packed up, and started for Bida.

We went up river on one of the stern-wheelers, as far as Dakmon on the
Kaduna River; there we found ponies, sent down from Bida to meet us, and
rode in, an easy march of about fourteen miles. We were struck with the
general air of prosperity and comfort displayed by the flourishing farms
and neat little hamlets, and were rather amused to come upon a scarecrow,
the first I had seen in this country.

It was a great day for Bida: no white woman had ever been there, and
the Emir and his people were determined to do honour to the event; so,
as we approached the town, a great concourse of people began to throng
down the hill from the Residency. At the head of the procession rode Mr.
Goldsmith, the Acting Resident, followed by the Emir, an immensely tall
and stout personage, gorgeously attired, and having a State umbrella held
over his head as he rode, and ostrich feather fans waved by attendants on
either side. Behind him followed the members of his family and ‘Court
officials,’ and the procession ended in a surging crowd, on horseback and
on foot. They made an attractive picture, splashes of brilliant colour
and snowy white robes and turbans dashing hither and thither, pulling up
their horses suddenly on their haunches, with a great display of jingling
brass and gaudy leather trappings, then darting off again, scattering the
crowd like irresponsible butterflies! After the ceremonial greetings we
all proceeded to the Residency, where more greetings ensued, and, on his
dismounting, one could get a better idea of the vast proportions of the
Emir—a truly huge man.

The city of Bida lies rather in a hollow, surrounded by low hills; its
wall extends for about nine miles, and is pierced by a number of large
gateways, most cunningly set, with dark recesses in their depths—probably
with a view to dealing effectually with unexpected or undesired visitors!
Inside, the streets are lined with shady trees, which give a delightfully
cool appearance to the thatched huts and market places. The Emir’s palace
is a great pile of clay buildings enclosed within a high wall, and on the
occasion when, accompanied by Mr. Goldsmith, we went to visit him, we had
an opportunity of inspecting the Nupe style of building and decoration.
The inner apartments were more or less like great vaults, unlighted save
by the doorways, and appeared to us, at first, to be in pitch-darkness;
but, after a time, when our eyes became accustomed to the gloom, we
could follow the outline of the high vaulted roof and the massive
pillars, the surface of which is plastered and beautifully polished
(I believe with special clay, obtained from the inside of ant-heaps),
resembling black marble.

It was an odd experience, sitting in the warm scented darkness, our
host and his people more guessed at than seen, great fans softly waving
behind him, and every rustle of every gown wafting out the heavy perfume
of musk, an interpreter conveyed in a hushed, monotonous murmur endless
salutations, compliments and pious aspirations between us, the atmosphere
was highly soporific, and we were all relieved when the Emir proposed a
move to the verandah.

I requested, and obtained permission to pay a visit to the ladies of
the harem, and, escorted by an aged—and presumably privileged—dotard, I
passed through the heavy door and found as great a contrast to the dim
quiet scene I had just left as could well be imagined! A crowd of women,
some mere girls, others middle-aged, nearly all carrying babies, and a
swarm of brown toddlers, all laughing, clapping their hands, calling
greetings and salutations incessantly. To them it was indeed a ‘bolt
from the blue,’ and, in their placid lives of seclusion, a marvellous
and startling occurrence; but, though they were frank enough in their
expressions of astonishment and pleasure, their perfect courtesy,
that fine characteristic of the African people, prevailed to restrain
them. There was no mobbing, no pushing, or crowding. I was invited to
seat myself on a large carved black stool, while the Emir’s mother, a
very aged sweet-faced woman, evidently set in authority above the rest,
crouched on the ground beside me, gently patting and smoothing my skirts
and feet, while she poured forth greetings and salutations, thanking
Allah fervently that ‘in her old age, she had been spared to see this
wonderful sight.’

[Illustration: THE EMIR ESCORTING US IN TO BIDA. (p. 27)]

[Illustration: DETAILS OF GOWN EMBROIDERY. (p. 31)]

It was very touching, and, at that time, I little thought I should ever
see her again, though, afterwards, I had frequent messages from her to
say that she still lived and still remembered, and when would I come back
and visit her again?

The Emir presented us with an enormous and almost embarrassing ‘dash’
or present—oxen, sheep, fowls and various special Bida products.
Fortunately, the custom (which hurts no one’s feelings) is to dispose of
the live stock in the market and present to the donor, in money or cloth,
the full value of his present, so I ‘bought in’ eagerly some of the
really beautiful coloured grass mats—there were seventy-five to choose
from!—and handsome brass-work, and bore them off with me when, on the
following day, we took leave of our kind host, and cantered down to the
Wonangi Creek, where our steel canoe was waiting, and slowly dropped
down stream to Lokoja.

I afterwards sent the Emir of Bida, as a token of friendship, a Hausa
gown, made for me locally, of white material, much pleated, and heavily
embroidered in white in the customary patterns, and this embroidery I
outlined and embellished with gold thread, producing a very fine rich
effect, which was highly appreciated by my friend.

A few words on the subject of Hausa embroidery may not be inappropriate
here, for it is distinctly interesting, and, in its way, artistic.

The finest and most elaborate needlework is found on the Hausa gown
or _tobe_, which, in itself, deserves a few words of description in
detail. The accompanying drawing gives an accurate idea of its shape—a
surplice-like garment of immense width, reaching to the ankles. The
material is frequently pleated all over from neck to knees, where it
falls loose, taking on a most up-to-date flow and expansion! I have
seen as much as thirty yards of wide English cloth put into one tobe;
under these circumstances, the weight of the gown is, of course, very
considerable.

These garments are made of every kind of stuff, according to the length
of the wearer’s purse; sometimes they are fashioned of European cotton
velvets, brocades and plush, and, in the districts where the Lagos trade
makes its influence felt, many of these gowns are to be seen, made,
alas, of shoddy velveteen, and the beautiful native needlework replaced
by tawdry tinsel and sequins. The vast majority, however, are composed
of country-made cloth, which is, by necessity of the tiny, primitive
looms, woven in narrow strips, some four inches wide, and laboriously
sewn together. Some of it is dyed with indigo or magenta, but the best
kind remains a creamy white, resembling a coarse heavy linen, and forms
a most desirable background for elaborate stitchery. The tobe has a deep
pocket on the left breast, reaching to the knees, and it is on this,
principally, that the embroidery is concentrated: there is also a single
circular design at the back, high on the left shoulder, which never
varies, though the decoration in front may be amplified and elaborated at
pleasure.

All the designs used in Hausa embroidery are obviously symbolical, and
their significance and history is a subject of deep interest, but it
is most difficult to acquire reliable information on the point, as the
people themselves are, for the most part, hopelessly ignorant about it,
and merely reproduce the same designs from generation to generation, for
the excellent—and, to them, conclusive reason that their fathers and
grandfathers did so!

The most frequent designs are the _Fuska_ (face) and the _Almakashi_
(scissors); these I have always found included in every decorative
scheme, however intricate and elaborate. The pattern is drawn in native
ink, with a pointed wooden pen; it is entirely free-hand, and is rather a
go-as-you-please process, with little regard for symmetry, though, in the
case of the gown I have illustrated, I think the complicated conventional
design is marvellously accurate for a free-hand performance.

The work is carried out in native thread, occasionally dyed with indigo,
or to the correct Islamic shade of brilliant green but usually of the
same creamy tint as the cloth itself. The stitchery is absolutely simple,
being mainly chain-stitch squares filled in with long stitches, and a
curious handsome effect is produced by a series of tiny eyelets, worked
in buttonhole stitch, giving a rich damask appearance. Couching stitch is
also used, and most patterns are outlined with French knots.

There is also another quite distinct kind of embroidery, universally
employed for decorating the enormously wide trousers worn underneath the
tobes. These voluminous garments terminate in an almost tightfitting
band, some nine inches deep, just above the ankle, and it is here, and on
the outside of the leg, that this needlework is lavished—a cunning piece
of vanity, as it is well displayed when the wearer strides about with a
sufficient swagger!

[Illustration: A TYPICAL HAUSA GOWN. (p. 30)]

[Illustration: TROUSER EMBROIDERY. (p. 32)]

The designs, as can be seen from the sketch, are quite different from
those used on the tobes; some are distinctly Masonic in character, some
are quite ecclesiastical, others suggestive of Persian embroidery. They
are carried out in gaily-coloured wools, procured from Lagos,—the usual
tints being bright crimson, royal blue, purple, orange, green and black.
The combination I am aware, sounds daring, to say the least of it, but
the result is wonderfully effective and brilliant, without being in the
least bit gaudy, and it always seems to me a thousand pities that so much
industry and real artistic effectiveness should be thrown away, usually,
on the most wretched materials, cheap cotton cloth from Manchester very
often, and on these inferior wools which will not bear the ordeal of a
single washing.

I have interested myself in collecting these designs, and have
worked them myself on the best linens with fast-dyed silks and the
equally beautiful modern flax threads, and the result is eminently
satisfactory—the designs, of course, requiring to be corrected and
straightened. Indeed, for tea-cloths, borders, cushions or doyleys,
and for an endless variety of decorative purposes, I think it would be
difficult to find embroidery of a more striking or original kind than
that peculiar to Nigeria.

In November, my husband had orders to accompany a patrol on the
Northern-Southern Nigeria frontier, and as friction with some of the
natives was a possible contingency, it was not thought advisable for me
to go too, so I remained in Lokoja alone, feeling sad and rather lonely,
and envying my better half the opportunity of finding ‘pastures new’
which I was unable to share.

On leaving, the Sahib commended me to the care of the Sariki and Chiefs
of Lokoja, mainly, I think, as a friendly joke, but they took the charge
quite seriously, dear souls, the whole cavalcade turning up regularly
each morning to make careful inquiries of the most minute description,
and to ask whether I did not ‘feel sad without the Resident!’ After a
few days they informed me that ‘it was quite impossible for them to take
_proper_ care of me while I lived so far away from them—they had a _fine_
compound swept out, next to the Sariki’s house, in the town—would I not
come and live there, till the Judge’s return?’

It was rather a dilemma, and I had to meet it by telling them how much
I should have enjoyed visiting them, but that I had my duty too, and I
must look after our house and garden, ponies and dogs, so as to keep
everything in order, and finally satisfied their kind hearts by promising
to send to them for all and anything that I might want! Each time a
letter arrived from the absentee, I summoned my friends, read it aloud,
translating each sentence as I went into halting Hausa; every single
word was repeated and passed round eagerly, discussed and commented
upon, amidst much chewing of kola-nuts, provided by the hostess, and
ponderous messages of an affectionate nature were impressively given me
for transmission in my reply!

The arrival of General and Mrs. Kemball cheered me greatly, and the week
they spent in Lokoja was a very happy one for me, in Mrs. Kemball’s
bright and sympathetic companionship. There was a cheery dinner-party at
the Mess in their honour, and I said good-bye very regretfully when they
went on their way to Zungeru. Shortly afterwards we had another glimpse
of them as they passed through on their way down river, and we little
thought then that our next meeting would be at Trinity Lodge, Cambridge!

One morning, three weeks later, I put on my riding habit with a very
light heart, and rode out, accompanied by the whole of the Sariki’s
cavalcade, to escort our ‘judge’ home in triumph. It was a glorious
morning, and perfectly delightful riding through the crops of
guinea-corn, now ripe, and standing ten feet high,—the leaves splashed
and stained with crimson, purple and gold, like gaudy, waving ribbons,
the heavy plumes of grain swaying above one’s head, brilliant red, or
black and white. Underneath the pony’s feet was a veritable carpet of
a tiny lilac blossom which always flourishes among the guinea-corn at
harvest time and hardly anywhere else. ‘The little pink flower that grows
in the wheat’ always comes into my mind, but this one happens to be mauve
instead!

We escorted our lord and master home—a most rowdy party, the boldest
spirits wildly racing their ponies along the winding track—girths
(composed of widths of ancient cotton cloth!) parting company
continually, and saddle and rider together taking a flying toss into the
grass, amid shrieks of delight from the rest of the crowd. At each tiny
hamlet the entire party would tumble off their ponies, greet and salute,
salute and greet, drink quantities of water, climb on again, set the
horns and drums braying their loudest, and gallop off irresponsibly, like
the light-hearted children that they are.

My husband afterwards told me that in the course of the patrol they
passed through a valley where the inhabitants of the rocks and hills
above apparently made their homes in holes and caves; one member of the
party idly asked what was the scientific name for cave-dwellers, it
having slipped his memory for the moment. No one appeared to be able to
supply the word, when the native interpreter, plodding along behind,
came up, saying: ‘Pardon me, sir, don’t you mean _Troglodytes_?’ The
Englishman, amazed, asked where he had ever heard such a word, and
‘George’ replied placidly: ‘I was _reading a dictionary_ one day, and I
saw it!’ I cannot imagine myself reading a German or Italian dictionary
for pleasure, and storing in my mind, for future use, conversationally, a
specially unusual scientific term; I only wish I could!

Christmas Day of that year found us at Egga, a small riverside town
on the right bank of the Niger, sixty miles above Lokoja. Canon
Robinson (in _Hausaland_) describes Egga as an island, from which one
may conclude that he only visited the place in the rainy season; we
have marched overland to Egga, and walked on dry—very dry—ground all
around it in May, and, three months later, passed over the same spots,
steaming easily in a stern-wheeler! It consists really of three or four
elevated tongues of land, with low-lying creeks in between, which are
so flooded by the rise of the river, that to traverse the town from end
to end several canoe journeys are necessary. On the high ground the
grass-roofed huts are clustered thick as bees, they perch perilously
on the very edge, threatening to topple into the creek below—perhaps
they do, sometimes, for the banks suffer considerably at each annual
rise in the water. Our domicile was perched in solitary state on one
of the small Ararats, farthest from the river bank, and that Christmas
morning, creeping from under the low verandah of the rest-house, I had
a glorious and uninterrupted view of mile upon mile of grass-land,
flanked in the distance by the curious flat-topped hills at Padda. The
distance was marked only by the ‘wire road,’ the telegraph line leaving
Egga and disappearing into the pearly iridescent Harmattan mists in an
ever diminishing perspective—the one link with civilization, unless one
counts, too, the ceaseless meagre stream of humble traders, in ones and
twos, padding in noiseless procession at the foot of our little hill,
making their way to Ilorin, at that peculiar half trot, half run, which
looks like walking, but which covers the ground in amazing fashion.

It was rather an event, this Christmas Day, the first we had spent in
Nigeria, and much care and thought had been expended on the dinner
menu. There was a plump turkey to be roasted in a native oven, a most
uncompromising-looking affair, consisting of a large earthenware pot,
half buried in the ground; this is heated by the simple process of
stuffing it full of blazing wood, and when the cook deems the temperature
high enough, he will haul out the fuel, pop in the turkey, plant a flat
piece of tin on the mouth of the oven, piling it up with much burning
wood—and, wonderful to relate, it _will_ roast the turkey to perfection!

The _chef_ had his work cut out for him that day, for the feast was to
include a most desirable fat teal, shot the day before, which had to be
similarly cooked in a similar oven; also a plum-pudding from ‘Home’,
round which most pleasurable anticipations hovered.

When the Christmas presents had been distributed to the household, the
morning spent itself peacefully in writing and sketching, the Sahib
working away, as the habit of political officers ever is out here, in
spite of my loud insistence on a whole holiday: all arrangements had been
made for an afternoon on the river, among the wild duck, and luncheon
had been despatched, when, with housewifely care, I bethought me of
making final arrangements for dinner, and summoned the cook. He was not
forthcoming, but, after much whispering and suppressed giggling among the
small boys of the household, Momo, our faithful head steward, appeared,
taking generous support from the side of the doorway, and adorned with a
vacant giddy smile that turned my heart to water!

Very slowly he spoke, and with deadly care; speech was very difficult,
but he struggled through manfully, and, though I was bubbling with wrath,
I could not help feeling sincere admiration. ‘The cook was _not at all_
well.... Yes, he certainly had drunk far too much pito (native beer)
... and he, Momo, had had a little too—for Kismiss!’—smiling vaguely
at the floor. ‘No, he did not think Jim Dow would be able to walk till
three o’clock, but’—with renewed cheerfulness, and a tremendous pull on
himself—‘Cook say he get _quite_ well very soon, cook dinner _proper_,
Missis go shoot, no fear at all.... Jim Dow fit to cook all right _very_
soon!...’

Well, there was no help for it—I certainly could not go and find the
delinquent in the purlieus of the town, nor, had I found him, could I
have done anything, so we resigned ourselves, sending the steward to
‘sleep it off,’ and reflecting that we might as well spend the afternoon
happily as not, we stepped warily into the native canoe, determined to
banish all dismal forebodings on the very slender chances of our getting
any dinner at all!

The canoe, an ordinary dug-out, about twenty feet long, contained our two
camp chairs, the guns, four polers, and Ganna.

Ganna is one of my many friends out here; he is the younger brother
of the Rogun or Chief of Egga, and has been interpreter to the late
Captain Abadie, and, like all who came in contact with him, had the
liveliest admiration and affection for him. He is in the latter stages
of consumption, poor soul, and has a thin eager face, a fair command of
English, and a terrible rending cough. He gets thinner each time I see
him, and though he sometimes comes to Lokoja, and attends the native
hospital there, the doctors can never give me any hope of his recovery.
Poor Ganna, I wonder if I shall ever see him again; the last time was
when we were poling down the river in a steel canoe, and, in the early
morning, as we drifted slowly past a tiny hamlet, a figure flew down the
bank, and the familiar emaciated face and skinny, almost transparent arms
appeared over the side, bearing a fine leopard skin, while, in a voice
saddeningly husky and laboured, Ganna explained how he had kept the
skin for us, watched for us many days, knowing of our approach in the
weird, mysterious fashion in which news travels in Africa. ‘Yes, he was
doing a little work now, but his chest hurt him, and he would come to
Lokoja when his work was finished ... he would go again to the hospital,
indeed he would, and ask the Likitor (Doctor!) for some more of that good
medicine.... Good-bye!... Sai wota rana! (lit. till another day) ...’ and
the canoe dropped down stream, leaving the sunken hollow eyes watching us
from the bank, and the painful hacking cough reaching our ears after the
corner was rounded. Poor Ganna, I wonder where our ‘wota rana’ meeting
will take place—not in Africa, I think!

[Illustration: A CAMP ON THE RIVER BANK. (p. 40)]

[Illustration: ROOFING AT KEFFI. (p. 51)]

However, this particular Christmas Day was four years ago, and Ganna
was then a stronger man, and a keen shikari, and had arranged this
shoot. I looked at him with special interest, as he crouched, smiling,
at one end of the canoe, clad in a dazzling white Hausa gown, heavily
embroidered in green—there seemed to be more of him than usual, and the
hope crossed my mind that he was perhaps gaining flesh. But, when we
had poled down the creek where the water-lilies are clustered thick,
past the Niger Company’s warehouses, and out on to the great grey river,
nearly half a mile wide, and shrouded in pale Harmattan mists, and were
sweeping rapidly down stream in the direction of the duck grounds, Ganna
dissipated my hopes by cautiously divesting himself of his white garb,
and emerging, clad in a faultless Norfolk suit of light tweed—a present
from his beloved master, as he explained proudly.

The water was like oil, greyness was everywhere as soon as the sun began
to drop into the haze, and a great silence prevailed—the loudest sound
being the crackling of numberless bush fires along the banks, for at this
season of the year the dry grass is fired, and in all directions there
are leaping tongues of flame and columns of smoke.

Presently, the ‘Quack! Quack!’ of contented ducks could be heard, and we
crept off our chairs and crouched in the bottom of our canoe, the polers
squatting motionless at either end, their wet poles slowly dripping into
the greasy-looking water, while the canoe drifted down to the sand-bank
where the ducks were—in their hundreds, some standing in the water,
preening their feathers, others solemnly waddling about on the bank—all
discoursing ceaselessly in their gossippy, monotonous language. The whole
bank was dark with them, tall, graceful ‘crown-birds’ standing motionless
or stalking thoughtfully about on the sand, plump, sturdy mallards, and
restless little teal, all busy, chatty, supremely happy, and utterly
unconscious of the danger creeping on them, in the drifting canoe.

We were so absorbed in watching the scene that we forgot the object
of our expedition, and, indeed, it seemed nothing short of criminal to
disturb a party so contented and peaceful, but the thousands of restless
little bright eyes spied the glint of a gun barrel, the alarm was given,
there was a rushing whirr, and the sky over our heads was instantly dark
with beating wings. A couple of shots brought down some victims, and
the canoe wended its way to another duck-ground, after landing me on a
sand-bank, for the purpose of sketching a picturesque little hamlet built
there by the fisher-folk during the season of low water, when they spend
their time catching and drying fish; later, when the water rises, and,
each year, sweeps away the whole colony of frail grass huts, they return
to Egga, and dispose of their season’s catch.

When the canoe, laden with further spoils, picked me up again, the sun
was just setting in the banks of mist, a gorgeous colour display of
sunset had turned the whole world rose-colour, giving to the water a
strange pale violet hue, and we had a good six miles to pole against a
swift current, so the nose of the canoe was turned up stream, and we
crept along close under the banks, where the stream is least strong, and
the edge gives some purchase for the poles.

Our progress seemed incredibly slow, but I could have sat there for ever,
slipping through the still evening, the silence only broken, away behind
us, by the faint quacking of disturbed and outraged ducks, returning
cautiously to the feeding-grounds; one felt at peace with all the world,
and I could not even bother to give an anxious thought to the complete
uncertainty of our dinner!

Ahead of us was a tiny canoe, with only one occupant, but fully laden
with newly-made earthenware pots, coming to seek a market at Egga;
steadily the man pulled, watching the sinking sun all the while; then, as
it finally disappeared, he deliberately poled into a flat sand-bank, tied
the canoe to the pole fixed in the sand, carefully washed and prepared
himself, then, with his face devoutly raised to the eastward sky, he
commenced his evening devotions. A picturesque figure with the flaming
sunset afterglow as a background, intent only on his prayer, unconscious
of our approach under the bank, alone and—to his knowledge—unseen, not a
gesture, not a movement of the hands, not a single word was omitted or
hurried over—a curious blending of simplicity and solemnity, and, as we
left him behind, I murmured, ‘Thy Father which seeth in secret ...’ and
the Sahib nodded his head comprehendingly.

It was quite dark when we slid into the Egga creek, and figures began to
move on the bank and lights flash as we pulled up; the most prominent
was a short, squat personage, clad in spotless white drill, white
shoes and a jaunty straw hat in his hand, holding the big lantern
and generally directing the disembarkation! Jim Dow, the sinner,
restored to his former greatness, perfectly sober and full of serene
cheerfulness—assuring us genially that he was ‘quite well again’ and the
dinner progressing most satisfactorily!

A scramble up to the rest-house, hot baths and a change—and Jim Dow was
quite as good as his word!




CHAPTER IV

Keffi


Immediately after the New Year we marched north from Egga to Pateji,
where we were to meet the Resident of Ilorin, and with him accomplish
the delimitating of the Ilorin-Kabba boundary. At one of our halts we
were lunching one day, when the servants ran in, begging us, in some
excitement, to ‘come and look!’ In the dusty roadway were a couple of
donkeys, loaded with potash, a pair of evil-looking men, and two of the
most forlorn, wretched little mites of children that it has ever been my
misfortune to see. The younger of the two was certainly not more than
four or five years old, both were crying helplessly, stumbling along in
the dust, limping and exhausted. They had begged our boys for water, and
so, most fortunately, attracted their attention.

It was the first case of obvious slavery I had ever seen, and the
terrible cruelty of it made one’s blood boil. My husband of course
detained the ‘caravan,’ the leader of which declared glibly that the
children were not slaves, but his own offspring, and that their mother
was just coming along behind. The elder toddler had spirit enough to cry
out: ‘We are not, we are not! He bought us, for a horse ... a _thin_
horse.’ ... with a mournful touch of self-pity. Presently, a young girl
came toiling along the road, and the caravan leader flung at her a flood
of a language unknown to us, so that, when questioned, she spiritlessly
agreed that they were her children. She was, herself not more than
fourteen or fifteen, and could not possibly have been the mother of
either child; her owner, when sternly reminded of this, hurriedly shifted
his ground, saying that this was not the woman of whom he had spoken,
the children’s mother was still further behind. This was greeted with
loud denials from the mites, who had already placed themselves definitely
under our protection! We had the caravan leader removed when the next
dejected figure came slowly in sight, and the new-comer immediately and
frankly described them all as slaves, confirmed the children’s story, and
with pitiful indifference remarked that they had already covered twelve
miles that day, and were prepared to travel another six, so as to avoid
the observation of the ‘White Judge.’

The men were taken into custody, the donkeys and loads confiscated, the
women elected to attach themselves to another caravan, travelling back
to their own district, and we took charge of the children. After a good
meal and twelve hours’ sleep, they were different creatures, but their
swollen feet made it almost impossible for them to walk a yard. I carried
the tiny boy on my knee, and, after a grunt or two of satisfaction,
his head dropped back on my shoulder, and he slept for hours. It was
not exactly a comfortable arrangement in a side-saddle, and we were
much relieved when we reached Pateji, and could ship our charges down
to Lokoja, where they became two of the liveliest inmates of the Freed
Slaves’ Home.

At Pateji, my husband found orders to return at once to Lokoja, hand
over the Province to a new Resident, then on his way out from England,
and start for Keffi, the headquarters of the Nassarawa Province, where
he was to take temporary charge. We crossed to Mureji, at the mouth of
the Kaduna River, and returned to Lokoja to make preparations for our
departure. There was excitement and unrest in the air, events in the
North had made the Kano-Sokoto Expedition an immediate necessity, the
greater part of the Force had already concentrated at Zaria, and the
Lokoja garrison was reinforced by troops from Southern Nigeria, under
the command of Major Moorhouse. Dr. Cargill, the Resident of Nassarawa,
was urgently needed at Kano, so, after a week spent by my husband in
initiating his successor into the mysteries of the daily work of a
Resident, we started off for Keffi, congratulating ourselves on this
opportunity of seeing a new part of the country.

We left Lokoja one hot day at the end of January, occupying a steel
canoe which was towed alongside by the steam canoe _Black Swan_. This
latter was—well, ‘occupied’ is not the word—_overflowed_ by a party of
officers and N.C.O.s; Captain Macarthy Morrogh and Mr. Steward being on
their way to join the Anglo-German Boundary Commission, Major Mackenzie
and Mr. Carré from Southern Nigeria, bound for Loko and Nassarawa to
recruit carriers. The two former had, of necessity, a great quantity of
stores and baggage, and the discomfort of that crowded canoe must have
been extreme, intensified as it was by the heat from their steam pipes: I
should imagine that on parting with four of us at Loko, the sentiments of
the remainder must have been unmixed relief!

The Benue River struck me as being remarkably clearer and purer in
colour than the Niger, and the scenery is very lovely. Each evening we
‘tied up’ by a convenient sand-bank, and the men camped there, rejoiced,
I fancy, to spread themselves out a bit. One evening the _Black Swan_
contingent gave a dinner-party, the novel feature of which was that our
menu was to consist of a ‘French dinner’—a most luxurious invention for
travellers, one large box containing five tins, each representing a
course, with fascinating French names. These only need to be heated in
boiling water—and, behold—your French dinner! As we were a party of six,
two ‘dinners’ were requisitioned, and we fared royally on delicious soup
for a start. After that, I fear the various cooks and boys got hopelessly
astray among the courses, for I found myself eating filleted sole, with
apple charlotte by way of a sauce! We gave up all attempt at sequence
after that, and simply ate our way through a list of most excellent
dainties, discovering many new and delectable combinations, and voted the
‘dinners’ an unqualified success!

At Loko the party broke up; we found ponies waiting for us, and hastened
off as soon as possible, for it is a most unpleasant mosquito-ridden
spot. The road to Keffi is monotonous and wearisome, consisting of the
path cleared for the construction of the telegraph line, and it is the
dullest process following that interminable wire, winding in between
the stumps of decapitated trees. The only halt of any interest on the
way was at Nassarawa, a town which had evidently ‘seen better days,’
finely situated on rising ground above a broad river. Keffi has always
had a sinister reputation—firstly as a famous slave market, and later
on as the scene of Captain Moloney’s tragic death. The Keffi people are
queer restless folks, finding their greatest pleasure, apparently, in
_munafiki_ or intrigue of all kinds. Our native friends in Lokoja shook
their heads dismally, and deplored our being obliged to go among these
‘bad, hard-hearted people,’ I remember, and were evidently prepared for
all kinds of unpleasant developments!

As we rode in through the South Gate, and up the long sandy road through
the town, it seemed indeed a desolate spot after the teeming streets of
Lokoja; nearly all the houses were unroofed (a precaution against fire in
the dry season), many were ruinous, and scarcely a soul was to be seen.
But, glancing into the narrow low doorways, one was conscious of lurking
forms and inquisitive peeping eyes; there were subdued scufflings as,
seeing themselves observed, the peepers scuttled off into devious back
alleys, like frightened rabbits. The town had been practically deserted
since the trouble of the previous autumn, when Captain Moloney’s death
took place, and the outlook was indeed a depressing one.

The Resident was occupying the great, mud-built pile, originally the
house of the Magaji, forming one side of an open square, just opposite it
was the Mosque, and on the left the Sariki’s ‘palace.’

The Residency was, to say the least of it, a gloomy spot for a
dwelling-house—a very large compound, surrounded by a thirty foot wall,
affording, at best, a view of the sky alone, the inside occupied by
a labyrinth of houses, some mere circular huts, dark and low, others
well-built, flat-roofed cool houses. Many of the smaller huts had been
pulled down, giving more light and air and improving matters greatly.
It was very quiet, very prison-like, scarcely a sound penetrated from
outside, save the cry of the Muezzins from the Mosque opposite, and only
terrific smells from the indigo dye-pits reminded one that there was life
and industry beyond the wall.

Dr. Cargill left for Kano almost immediately, and we settled down to
await the arrival of our relief, Mr. Granville. A detachment of the
N.N.R. had ‘barracks’ near the South Gate, and Mr. Wilcox, in command,
was our daily companion when we went out shooting in the evenings, the
country round Keffi producing plenty of birds, or when we explored the
higher ground behind the town, searching for a suitable site for a new
Residency.

On the summit of a high hill, overlooking the town, was a circular wall,
enclosing a solitary grave, the resting-place of Captain Moloney, and, in
the square, outside the Mosque, stood a tall white wooden cross, marking
the spot where he died. All honour to those who placed it there—but
that cross has always been a sorrow to me: close beside the wall of the
Mosque, it could not fail to be an offence to a Mahomedan community, and,
being on the way to the market, each man, woman and child who passed,
must be reminded daily of the tragedy that had ruined the prosperity of
the town, and wrecked so many innocent, humble homes.

During the short time we were at Keffi, we spared no pains in
endeavouring to ‘re-establish confidence’ walking about the town in every
direction, and striving to make friends with the people. They were, even
then, beginning timidly to return and to come to the market, and, before
we left, we had the satisfaction of seeing hundreds of nice new thatched
roofs appearing, and the householders coming to their doors to call
greetings and salutations, instead of making panic-stricken rushes in the
opposite direction!

[Illustration: NATIVE DRUMMERS AT KEFFI. (p. 54)]

[Illustration: A DETACHMENT OF THE N.N. REGT. (p. 68)]

Our thoughts, while there, were naturally occupied with the sad events
of Captain Moloney’s death, and we heard the story in detail from the
Resident’s clerk, a native called Silva, who was present, and as his
account of it is rather a curious one, I may mention it here, though,
of course, I cannot vouch for the absolute truth of it, and give it
just as it was told to me. The main facts (I am quoting partly from the
best authority, the High Commissioner’s Annual Report for 1902) are as
follows:—

On the day in question, Captain Moloney, being anxious to ‘come to an
amicable understanding’ with this influential Chief, the Magaji, who
had apparently been giving him much trouble throughout the Province,
slave-raiding and robbing caravans, and preferring to endeavour by
argument and persuasion to win him over to the side of law and order,
and make of him a useful friend to Government, determined on a decisive
interview, while he had a large military force temporarily at Keffi, to
back up his authority if needful. The account runs thus:—

‘Captain Moloney ... went to the king’s house, and the Magaji was
summoned to attend. He declined to do so, and Mr. Webster, Assistant
Resident, was sent to fetch him. Misled by the Government native agent,
to whose intrigue and false representations it now appears probable that
the deplorable results which followed were directly due, Mr. Webster
entered the private quarters—probably the harem—of the Magaji. That Chief
was surrounded by armed retainers, who immediately set upon Mr. Webster.
He very narrowly escaped with his life, and was eventually seized
and literally thrown out. Captain Moloney then sent him to call up a
detachment of troops. The Magaji, seeing his arrest was imminent, rushed
out of his house, and killed Captain Moloney and the agent, Awudu, before
the soldiers could reach the spot. He and his followers then fled, but
sent messages that they would presently return and finish their work.’

Now, this clerk, Silva, had been a hospital dresser, and the task of
preparing Captain Moloney’s body for burial, fell to him. He declared
earnestly and emphatically that there was no wound on the body
whatsoever, except an arrow wound in the neck which had pierced the
carotid artery, and caused almost immediate death. He further described
how the Magaji was armed with a ‘gun’ _only_, he did not touch Captain
Moloney, but rode straight at Awudu, the native agent, who, as described
by the High Commissioner, was the cause of the whole trouble, and, crying
out, ‘_You_ have done this! It is your fault!’—shot him dead, as he
ran, in terror, towards the barracks. The whole crowd of the Magaji’s
followers, rushing out like a swarm of angry bees, of course fired off a
cloud of arrows, more or less at random, and, from this man’s earnestly
told story, it seems fairly certain that it was one of these which killed
Captain Moloney. The old Sariki of Keffi, who was standing close by,
endeavoured to support the wounded man, but received an arrow himself, in
the foot—a slight wound, however, from which he recovered.

These differing facts do not, however, in the least remove from the
Magaji’s shoulders the indirect guilt of murder, although his hand may
not have given the actual death-blow; he was said to have been killed at
Burmi, among the army of the Ex-Sultan of Sokoto, in the following July.

We beguiled some of the long hot hours by making an effort to learn
Arabic; we did not progress very far or very fast, but, indeed, I think
circumstances were rather against us! Our teacher spoke Arabic and
Hausa—no English, of course—we spoke Hausa, much English, and, in moments
of excitement, as our habit is—voluble Hindustani! Our text-book and
dictionary were Arabic-French! Something like a miniature Tower of Babel
ensued, and we decided to postpone our studies till a more favourable
opportunity presented itself! I also amused myself by decorating the
whitewashed walls of our house with sketches, which completely depleted
my paint-box, but entertained me mightily—I believe they are still to be
seen there!

We had bought a very handsome pony in Keffi, and one day, to our
distress, he developed violent colic, and appeared to be dying. Every
available remedy was applied, and for the whole afternoon he was fomented
with hot blankets, but he lay helpless, swollen, limp and moaning. We
then resigned him, at our boy’s earnest request, into the hands of a
native horse-doctor, a wizened old individual, who stood and looked,
then, remarking laconically, ‘He will recover!’ proceeded, with great
difficulty, of course, to get the pony on to his feet. He then passed
his hands five or six times down the pony’s flanks, murmuring to himself
the while, finally taking the muzzle in both hands, he looked very hard
into the pony’s eyes, recited a string of rapid Arabic sentences and,
stooping low, blew into each nostril three times. I stood by watching and
wondering, then, in amazement, realized that _a cure had been effected_!
The ‘doctor’ stood aside, and announced as placidly as ever: ‘He has
recovered!’ directing that a bran mash should be given at once; this
‘Kim’ ate eagerly, and never showed another symptom of pain or illness! I
cannot explain this cure in any way; I can only say that I saw it done,
and done in less than ten minutes, and that the wizard stoutly declined
to give me his prescription or to share the secret!

Shortly afterwards, Mr. Granville arrived and took over, and we rode
out of Keffi, feeling distinctly light-hearted, as we had ‘Leave’ and
‘Home’ before us. But the impression of gloom and sadness left on my
mind by Keffi was deepened later, for we never saw Mr. Wilcox again, as
he died at Bauchi a few months later. Mr. Carré, one of our cheery party
on the Benue River, also died, Mr. Granville was invalided Home later,
dangerously ill, and Major Marsh, whose kind genial face was the last we
saw on leaving Lokoja, was killed in July at Burmi, to our sorrow.

We started for England at the end of March, and had a most comfortable
trip on the _Jebba_—one of the few voyages I have ever enjoyed; we were
fortunate in our weather, our fellow-travellers, and in most of the
amenities of boardship life, and I ‘lazed’ on deck, feeling very well
satisfied with my first year in Northern Nigeria. I had ridden over three
thousand miles, learnt a new language, made thousands of new friends in
the animal and flower world, as well as valued human ones, I felt as if
I had ‘enlarged my borders’ mentally, and had certainly begun to know and
love Africa with a deep affection that, I think, is never lost by those
who once acquire it.

My husband was elected to the Hausa Scholarship at Cambridge, and we
spent a truly delightful May Term there, which passed only too quickly in
the cordial friendship of charming cultured people, and among the lovely
surroundings of the University.




CHAPTER V

Trekking North


The following September we turned our faces again towards Nigeria. The
‘Home’ climate had somewhat disgusted us, exemplified as it was by
weeks of hopeless, unceasing, soaking rain in Scotland, and, but for
the horrible wrench of parting again with our nearest and dearest, we
prepared for our return in the most cheerful spirits.

My husband had been appointed to a new Province, eastward from Kano,
named Katāgum, one which had come inside the scope of the Administration
as a result of the Sokoto Expedition, and hitherto had not been
‘administered’ at all. The prospect of absolutely new ground, the North
country, people of a high-class Mahomedan type, all appealed strongly
to us both, especially as our way lay through Kano, of which we had all
heard so much during the last six months.

To our responsibilities we added an irresistible little fox-terrier,
acquiring him absurdly cheap from a dealer, on account of what the
latter called a ‘marble’ in his eye—a sort of discoloured patch, which,
although, of course, a blemish, did not appear to affect his sight,
and was almost certainly the result of a blow. This fact we were able
to deduce from subsequent events. Long before we reached Africa, we
discovered that Binkie had an undying hatred for any one who had the
temerity to wear _blue trousers_!

He commenced to act on this principle at once, by attempting to bite the
guard of the train, made unfriendly overtures to the hall-porters at the
hotel in Liverpool, although on the most affectionate terms with every
one except the wearers of these obnoxious garments; on the landing-stage,
in the intervals of caressing, and being caressed by a little girl, he
made purposeful grabs at one and all of the blue-clothed porters, and
reached the zenith of his reputation by biting two quarter-masters on
board! It was a tiresome, and, incidentally, expensive habit, as we had
no muzzle for him, and I only breathed freely on landing in Lokoja, where
the majority of the inhabitants are guiltless of blue trousers. To do
him credit, I must say he never touched a native, but I had to scan the
garments of my callers anxiously, and warn Binkie accordingly!

On the way down the Coast we were given a ten days old bull terrier pup,
a very highly-bred little person, who, having had the audacity to be
born with a fawn-coloured patch, had thoroughly disgraced himself in
his owner’s eyes. We had a difficult time rearing him, and nights in bed
became ‘things hoped for, not seen!’

On arrival in Lokoja we found Mr. Wallace there, just starting up river
to Zungeru, and he gave us a cordial invitation to visit him there,
when we had made the necessary preparations in Lokoja collecting ‘the
office furniture’ for Katāgum, and engaging carriers. While there we were
burgled in a fashion so characteristic that it may be worth describing.

My husband was known—evidently—to have a large sum of money in silver;
this he deposited, naturally, in the largest, heaviest, and therefore
least removable of our boxes, but the enterprising burglar evidently
thought that a tin uniform case (which happened to be padlocked) looked
promising, and, during a tornado at night, carried it off!

We discovered our loss early next morning, and I was utterly dismayed,
as its contents were mainly a new photographic outfit, chemicals, paper,
etc. We ‘communicated with the police,’ but, meantime, some thirty
carriers came to be enrolled, and, guided by previous experience, my
husband informed them of the loss, expressed an opinion that the box was
not far off, and, telling them to search the ‘bush,’ offered a reward
of five shillings to the finder. The grass all round was over the men’s
heads, and drenchingly wet, but they plunged gaily in, shouting and
hunting, and in less than half an hour emerged triumphant, with the box
and its contents, the latter practically ruined, having been scattered
far and wide in the frantic but unavailing search for money. It must have
been a ‘horrid sell’ for the thief; his only prize—at least, the only
article missing—was the clockwork engine of a toy train, which I had
brought out as a present for a small black friend! He had, luckily, quite
overlooked a large envelope, containing stamps to the value of £25, the
nucleus of a Katāgum post-office!

We left Lokoja, a large party of twelve or fourteen people, with various
destinations, rather tightly packed on the _Sarota_, and, during a
tornado, trying to shut a cabin window, my husband had a nasty accident,
absolutely tearing the nail right out of one finger. It was not an
auspicious moment for even a ‘partial disablement,’ and gave him a bad
time at first, but healed splendidly, and, in spite of many gloomy
prognostications, he succeeded in growing a new nail eventually!

We made our way up the Kaduna in a steel canoe, slept one night under a
corrugated iron shed at Barijuko, and the next morning started ‘by train’
for Zungeru. It was an experience quite amusing for the first time;
safely embarked in a roofed-in truck we rattled, bumped and swayed along
the tiny line, with much shouting and vociferation; various passers-by,
walking to Zungeru, placidly crossed the line in absent-minded fashion,
under the nose of the crazy little engine, and had terrific abuse and
chunks of coal hurled at them by the native engine driver. The dirt was
choking, and the noise made speech impossible, so I clutched my bull-pup
tightly, and watched with interest the flowers along the line—glowing
yellow coreopsis, tall and slender, away down below were patches of
vernonia purpurea, like a copper-coloured ‘button’ chrysanthemum, while
the grass was thickly dotted with a tiny rose-coloured flower, one which
grows in uttermost profusion there and in the North, but which I have
never seen farther South.

Some days later we had an opportunity of really appreciating the
tram-line, when we made an expedition to Wushishi on a pump trolley, and
found it a really exhilarating and delightful method of travelling!

We got a warm welcome from Mr. Wallace, and spent a few days with him,
enjoying his cordial hospitality and kindness while we made our final
preparations for our start. Government House is, indeed, an ‘oasis in the
desert’ to the weary traveller, luxuriously furnished with costly English
furniture, soft carpets, bright chintzes and silk curtains, and fitted
with electric light; it is all very charming, though, perhaps, not the
very best preparation for thirty days in the bush!

My husband had brought out from Home a couple of mono-wheel carts, his
own invention, and now had them put together preparatory to our long trek.

The cart, briefly, consisted of a single wheel, about three feet high,
which revolved in the centre of a platform six feet by four, with
ordinary wheel-barrow handles at either end. The platform was fixed
below the wheel axle, and thus lowered the centre of gravity as much as
possible, and lessened the inclination to fall over. While in England two
ordinary carpenters in the workshop where the carts were built, had taken
one with a load of about seven hundred pounds up and down streets with
ease, and we were therefore delighted, and hoped that Nigerian transport
would receive a helping hand thereby. Alas! we had not reckoned with
the carrier, who, we fondly imagined, would prefer the lesser effort of
trundling to carrying. He would have none of it! While the man behind
had to raise the handles and start, the one in front, whose duty was
only to pull and assist the balance, would also endeavour to lift! This,
naturally, threw much more weight on the back handles, with the result
that every few yards the whole thing would tumble over and have to be
reloaded. Even placing a man on either side to prevent this happening
made no appreciable difference, and, in desperation, we were finally
obliged to engage extra carriers for the contents of the carts, and
eventually marched into Zaria, the carts being triumphantly carried on
the heads of two men!

At that time the path on leaving Zungeru, was simply villainous, beset
with huge stones which even the one wheel could not avoid with the
cleverest of steering, and this increased the local prejudice immensely.
I really think that, had Fate decreed for us an ordinary, fairly level
and well-patted down bush path, some nine inches wide, miles of which
are to be found in some districts, and had our men been able to get
accustomed to the novelty under such circumstances, the invention would
certainly have proved a success and a great convenience at distant
stations, where, at present, a tin of kerosene oil, for example, adds ten
shillings or more to its original cost by the time it arrives, on account
of the carrier’s pay. Later on, while we were detained at Kano, we tried
to make a single cart out of the two, using both wheels, but with a very
narrow track, about two feet wide, and this worked excellently until
the dry wind of the Harmattan and the fierce sun heat through the day
so ruined the wood-work that the wheels came to pieces, all the spokes
falling out. Upon this we sorrowfully resigned the idea until a more
favourable opportunity, and endured the daily irritation of seeing loads
damaged by being rubbed off at each convenient tree by pack animals!

But this digression has taken me far ahead of my story, which must be
resumed at Zungeru, where, one hot afternoon, on the 29th of October,
we said good-bye to Mr. Wallace, and finally departed, while the
bull-terrier pup shrieked aloud at being immured in a basket and treated
as a ‘load’; we walked down to the river crossing, and were ferried over
in a crazy canoe half full of water, which started my new riding-boots
on their downward path! We afterwards discovered that one box had been
planted comfortably in the same water, and, on opening it some days
later, a sad scene of literal ‘blue ruin’ greeted our eyes—books,
writing-paper, photographs, clothing, all hopelessly destroyed and
mildewed—such is African travel!

We slept at Ganan Gabbas, a dirty stuffy little hamlet, and a sharp
contrast to our quarters of the night before, but, happily, we were not
in the least disposed to feel depressed over the absence of armchairs and
soft carpets!

I was interested in watching the young wife of one of the native police
among the escort, bathing her tiny baby (three months old) in the chill
morning air before sunrise, the cold water being well smeared all over
the little brown body, while the poor mite—naturally—yelled lustily! The
bath finished, no drying operations being included, the mother scooped up
a handful of water, closed her hand with the thumb pointing downwards,
and, using the latter as a kind of spout, directed a stream of water
into the baby’s mouth, slowly and steadily, totally disregarding loud
gurgles, chokes and struggles of protest: meantime she was feeling
and pressing the rapidly expanding little stomach, until convinced, I
suppose, that its limit of capacity was reached. This treatment is meted
out to all the babies, and is considered to be a great strengthening
agent! This Spartan parent, having strapped the baby tightly to her
back, and made ready for the start, stooped to lift a towering load of
calabashes and other household goods, and doing so, put her shoulder out.
She appeared to suffer a good deal of pain, but took it quite quietly,
turning meekly to her husband, who, with one bare foot planted under the
injured arm, gave a mighty pull, and with a snap the joint returned to
its place. She thanked him prettily, adjusted the load on her head, and
started off happily on her day’s march!

The march proved an interesting one, though very hot; the autumn is
almost the best time of the year to ‘see the country’; in the farms the
guinea-corn was just beginning to ripen and droop its massive plumes of
grain, underfoot was a terribly stony path, but much of the road lay over
hills, and we got magnificent views of miles upon miles of wooded hill
and plain, unrolling themselves into the dim blue distance.

At Zaria we pitched our tent on the wide plain outside the great pile
of mud buildings then used as the Residency. Every one was most kind to
us, giving us every sort of assistance. Major Hasler, then commanding
the Mounted Infantry at Zaria, specially delighted me by a present of a
huge bunch of the most splendid zinnias I have ever seen—grown in the
tiny garden round his quarters. He and a brother officer, I remember,
‘spread a banquet’ for us, as they expressed it, and a very merry party
it was. Some anxiety was experienced during the afternoon as to the
probable behaviour of a very special feature of the feast—a claret
jelly—and diligent search was made for the coolest and breeziest spot in
which to ‘set’ it. Our minds were relieved, however, by the triumphant
announcement that it had ‘jelled’ admirably in plenty of time for dinner.
We had quite beautiful table decorations of a lovely rose-coloured
shrub, cunningly set in discarded cigarette tins, and one of our hosts,
in his determination to do honour to the very first ‘Ladies’ dinner’
in Zaria, decided on most daring flights in his costume. But, alas!
difficulties intervened, and after a little delay, he appeared—full
of apologies—magnificent in regulation English evening dress, with a
peerless glossy shirt-front, a tie tied to perfection—but _no collar_!
This item was ‘lost, stolen or strayed,’ but our intrepid soldier friend
did not for a moment allow such an obstacle to defeat his original plan,
I am glad to say!

The road northward from Zaria was interesting, a regular market garden,
miles upon miles of cultivation and farms; the grass was quite fine
and short, utterly unlike the luxuriant growth down south, and tinged
with a warm brownish red shade, which made a delicious ‘colour scheme,’
stretching away under great spreading trees into the far pearly blue haze.

We found Bebeji most interesting. On approaching it, the scene seemed
familiar, and we felt convinced that we had seen it before, until
we recollected the delicately executed pencil drawings illustrating
Barth’s travels: here were the very same isolated tall palm trees, the
flat-roofed massive buildings, high clay walls, and only the shortest
and most meagre of herbage. We were given quarters in a couple of
excellent cool lofty rooms, with a vaulted roof, beamed with wood and
decorated high up with gaudy coloured earthenware plates of the commonest
description, but much appreciated for this kind of mural decoration. We
were destined to see them very often afterwards, and in any dwelling
which has been hastily quitted by the occupants during war or under the
influence of panic, almost invariably the plates are torn from the walls
and carried off.




CHAPTER VI

Kano


I suppose no one can approach Kano, even to-day, without a certain thrill
of excitement and interest. One’s thoughts involuntarily turn back to the
days when it was all but inaccessible to white men, and yet the mere name
of it was a kind of lodestar, irresistibly attracting travellers in the
face of almost insuperable difficulties. One thinks of Clapperton, Lander
and Barth journeying hither, and rather specially, perhaps, of Richard
Oudney, who died within a few days’ march of the goal.

I believe that every member of our party, down to the most irresponsible
‘small boy,’ had something to express in the way of satisfaction and
excitement when the long red wall began to appear above the horizon, and
we approached the very place of all others which we too had so longed to
reach and see for ourselves.

Outside the gate, the Resident, Dr. Cargill, met us and escorted us
through the city. Our way did not lie through the markets and busiest
thoroughfares, and, looking back, I think my first impression was the
surprising area of open ground inside the walls, the vast stretches of
cultivation and flourishing farms. This is intentional, and has been done
for all time, so that in the event of a long siege, the inhabitants would
be well supplied with food-stuffs, and practically independent of the
farms outside the walls.

It took us an hour to pass through the city, and I fear I carried away
only a misty impression of my first ride through Kano—blurred through
my very eagerness to see, to absorb, to miss nothing, added to my
delight at being there, and anxiety to make the most of my very special
privilege in being the first white woman to enter there! I can only
recall breathless heat, glaring sunshine on pink walls and white dusty
ground, in sudden contrast to the warm, dark purple shadows, an endless
stream of passers-by thronging to and from the various markets—hundreds
of different types, diversely clothed, speaking different languages,
but all ready with courteous salutations and friendly greetings—it made
one’s eyes ache and brain whirl, and it was something of a relief to pass
through the gloomy depths of the Nassarawa Gate, and ride up the grassy
mile leading to the Residency, formerly the Emir’s summer palace. Later
on I had opportunities of learning to know the great city better, but,
living as we did, outside the city, and quite four miles from the markets
and busy streets, each visit was somewhat of an expedition, and it was
hard to get more than cursory glimpses of the life that was lived there,
and the immense volume of trade going on daily.

In the year 1824 Clapperton recorded, in the simple, naïve fashion that
characterizes the whole of his narrative, how, on approaching Kano, he
attired himself in all the bravery of his naval uniform and rode into
the town, and not a soul in the crowded markets turned a head to look at
him, but, ‘all, intent on their own business, allowed me to pass without
remark!’

So is Kano to-day; to the casual sight-seer or the curio-hunter it has
little or nothing to offer, no beauties of architecture, no minarets,
no palaces—the smallest Indian bazaar displays more gay colours, more
material for the globe-trotter’s satisfaction. Kano is a centre of
strenuous trade, there is no dallying and chattering and laughter, no
sign of the ubiquitous hawker of trifling curios, who haunts an Indian
bungalow, and even squats below the verandah of a Lokoja house to-day.
The wares that have been brought across the Great Desert amid perils
and hazards innumerable are not to be lightly disposed of, and the
fierce-eyed swaggering Arabs do most of their bartering privately within
the square, dark, low buildings, over much coffee and many cigarettes.

The great pulse of commerce, here, is as well concealed as is the
throbbing heart in a motionless body, and gives as little sign of its
presence to the casual passer-by, unless he looks keenly enough at the
silent hurrying throng all intent on trading for a livelihood, not
sauntering, idling, gossiping, like the denizens of an Eastern city. The
sternness of the Desert influences the whole place and the people of
it. Patient seeking in the various markets reveals an almost incredible
collection and variety of wares: Turkish coffee, green tea, French sugar,
delicious rare tobacco, silks and cloth, all can be bought at a price—an
enormous price, too, be it said!

But it is Kano itself as a city, rather than as a commercial centre,
which stands out in my memory distinct, unique, with a charm all its
own, like nothing else in the world. Almost all those who saw the city
for the first time that year, when it became the youngest-born of the
Mother Government, expressed great disappointment with its appearance; I
have heard it contemptuously stigmatized as a ‘glorified mud-heap,’ and
it is often complained that the actually inhabited portions occupy so
small a space inside the huge area of those massive walls. This, to my
mind, constitutes one of the city’s greatest fascinations. There is such
infinite breadth and restfulness about those vast stretches of short,
crisp turf, surrounding the streets and alleys and humming markets; such
a wonderful peace and dignity about those two astonishing, jagged,
flat-topped hills, ‘Kazauri’ and ‘Dala,’ standing up abruptly in the
middle of the plain, like tireless mighty sentinels, watching ever, in
every direction, over the distant line of serrated pinkish wall.

[Illustration: A KANO STREET SCENE. (p. 75)]

[Illustration: A KANO MOUNTED MESSENGER. (p. 81)]

This wall itself is an object lesson to any one who grumbles at the
quality of Kano’s architecture. It is fifteen miles in circumference,
forty feet high, and wide enough to drive a motor-car round the inside
terrace, without much danger to life or limb: at the base it is not much
less than eighty feet wide. There are two deep ditches set moat-like
outside the wall; from these all the material for the huge fortification
has been taken. How many weary days of ceaseless patient labour, how many
pairs of industrious hands have gathered that incredible mass of clay,
handful by handful, carried it in miserable little grass baskets and
calabashes, piled up the walls and gates inch by inch, till Kano became
the impregnable fortress of the Western Soudan—why, the very thought is
stupendous!

Remember, these simple folks have no tools, save one roughly fashioned
implement, shaped like a pickaxe, that can do no more than loosen
the soil—beyond this, nothing but ten slim, brown fingers, and that
magnificent disregard for time which pervades Africa and makes such
marvels possible. As an achievement, I think this plain, loop-holed clay
wall compares favourably with any of the glorious monuments and fairy
palaces of Indian fame.

The gates—thirteen in number—are on the same scale, massive solid square
towers, with a narrow passage and various shadowy recesses. The slaves of
Kano in the early days must have been as the sand of the sea, for, inside
the city, the buildings are on the same plan and of the same material. In
Africa, it is only to the white man that Nature shows a brazen pitiless
face; to the child of the soil she is tenderly, munificently bountiful.
The clay for building Kano was under their feet; they dug it out, and
set up enormous dwellings, almost fortresses, masses of cool dark halls,
windowless except for slits high up near the vault of the roof, where the
temperature never varies by ten degrees all the year round. And if by
doing so they _did_ leave great deep pits everywhere, which, in the rainy
season, are filled with water, and even through the six months of deadly
drought remain stagnant and smelling horribly—well, of course these are
fearful evils from a sanitary point of view, and undeniably odoriferous,
but that they add an additional charm can hardly be disputed, the
foul surfaces hidden by a carpet of clustering water-lilies, and the
softly sloping edges clothed with velvety green grass. There is one
in particular, so large that it forms a fair-sized lakelet, once a
place of grisly association, for it was formerly the custom to execute
criminals on its banks: but now the utterly placid surface reflects,
like a mirror, its surroundings—houses, palm-trees, the splendid,
branching-horned cattle, sheep and goats cropping the smooth greensward
around the brink, and the ceaseless _va et vient_ of the passers-by.
Slender, straight-featured Fulani girls come to fill their water-pots,
balancing them on their heads with inimitable grace; the whole scene is
faintly veiled and shrouded in the milky haze of the Harmattan, and the
slow-rising aromatic smoke. Yes—it may spell malaria and miasma to some,
but if any one can pass the ‘Jakko’ as it is called without drawing rein,
I am sorry for him, for he has missed one of those special moments that
come to us all, perhaps only once in a lifetime.

One particular evening, just before sunset, as we rode slowly across
one of the great levels, sounds of trumpets and drums, mingled with
occasional explosions of gunpowder, came drifting along to us, and
presently his High and Mightiness, the Emir, came forth for his evening
ride, having duly notified his intention beforehand to the Resident—a
piece of deferential courtesy never omitted.

He was a fine specimen of the handsome Fulani, regular in features, full
of keen intelligence, and extremely dignified. He wore tobe upon tobe,
gowns ample in material, gorgeous in colouring, lavishly striped with
crimson, gold and blue—French silks which have travelled from Tripoli,
and decorated with silver Turkish embroidery. His ‘fulah’ or turban
was immense and snowy-white, the folds drawn over his nose and chin,
a necessary precaution against dust. He sat with ease and majesty on
a proud-stepping camel, head and shoulders above the surging crowd,
caparisoned and ornamented with leather, coloured red, blue, green and
yellow—a thoroughly regal figure.

Six hundred horsemen or thereabouts accompanied this almost daily ride,
all rushing, galloping, saluting, waving arms and shouting, horses
rearing and flinging bloodstained foam around, maddened by the cruel iron
bit, sharp spurs, and metal, shovel-shaped stirrups, dashing off into the
great cloud of dust which followed them, enveloping the throng streaming
after on foot, banging drums, blowing shrill blasts on trumpets six or
eight feet long, and firing off fusilades from ancient flint-locks and
muzzle-loaders! It was a curious spectacle, widely apart from the world
of to-day, and one that might have stepped out of the Arabian Nights or
the stirring days of Shah Jehan.

[Illustration: A KANO CARAVAN DONKEY DRIVER. (p. 88)]

We watched them on their way, and rode slowly about the city, finding
something new and fascinating at every turn, till the scarlet sun dropped
behind the far-off wall, and the rugged side of Kazauri and Dala turned
rosy-red, indeed the whole city glowed suddenly pink, and the heavy
smoke wreaths twined in sapphire blue curves in the rapidly cooling
atmosphere. It was obviously time to go home; the Emir was back in his
palace, and only a few straggling horsemen and a cloud of dust marked
where he had passed; the mu’ezzins were already calling in all directions
from the summit of the Mosques, ‘Allahu akbar! Allahu akbar!’ and the
faithful were wending their way to evening prayer. Reluctantly we turned
our horses’ heads, passed through the Nassarawa Gate, gloomy and dark
in the fading light, cantered up the wide sandy road to the Residency,
in the swiftly falling darkness of the African night, and were suddenly
jerked back into civilization and modernity, to the dusty parade-ground,
English voices, and joyful leaping fox-terriers!

The Residency itself, our home for the time being, consisted of a very
large compound, surrounded by a high wall and entered by the usual
recessed gatehouse. Inside the courtyard were several massive buildings,
one the first two-storeyed native houses I had seen. They were great
vaulted apartments, cool and dim, eminently suited to African royalty,
but as dwellings for English folk, more than a trifle gloomy. However,
we found our spacious mansion (extremely like a crypt!) was speedily
and easily brightened by the introduction of clean matting, a few
cheerful-tinted cloths, and quantities of sketches and pictures on the
sombre brown walls. The upper storey was reached by a solid staircase
of clay, and comprised a fine large room with plenty of light and air,
commanding a splendid view over the imprisoning compound wall.

Outside were the hospital buildings, the barracks where the detachment
of the N.N.R. was quartered, and, beyond, the Mounted Infantry Lines
and officers’ quarters, all forming a sort of semicircle round the
parade-ground, where I used to sit and watch many an exciting game of
polo, rendered more eventful by sundry rather alarming obstacles on the
ground itself, in the shape of holes and tree-stumps. There was, in
particular, a cotton tree, in the buttresses of which the ball lodged
itself with malignant and unerring precision; the process of hooking it
out looked so extraordinary to an observer, that one might almost wonder
‘what the game was!’

I tried, as usual, to make a garden, but it was up-hill work—every scrap
of earth had to be carried in from outside the compound, sheep and
donkeys from the caravans regularly smashed the frail fence, and trampled
on the beds, hordes of lizards nipped the head off each seedling as it
appeared, and, the month being December, the middle of the dry season, my
efforts were utterly defeated.

I suppose there was not ‘much to do’ as a matter of fact, but the
daily stream of caravans, pausing to pay their toll, were an unfailing
interest; we were a fairly large community, amongst whom were some old
friends of Indian days, the cool hours were filled with polo, and the
horses of the Mounted Infantry proved a continual point of attraction
for an evening stroll, every one was sociably inclined, and we all gave
dinner-parties according to our several abilities. We had even a patient
in hospital to concern ourselves about—he gave us plenty of food for
thought for a time, but, I am glad to say, recovered absolutely, and has
probably completely forgotten the many evenings when he lay, weak and
helpless, in the dropping twilight, watching the flying figures in the
dust outside, and listening to the cheerful shouts as the last ‘chukker’
came to an end. I hope he has, for they must have been long weary hours.

We were very happy at Kano, and sincerely sorry when the time came for us
to pack up again and start on the last stage of our journey North.




CHAPTER VII

Katāgum and Hadeija, and Back


On December, 15 we actually left Kano. Trials and tribulations had
already been our share in more than generous measure, over the collection
of animals for transport, to replace the carriers who had brought our
belongings so far. The donkeys were difficult to obtain and wretchedly
small, and the problem of tying up miscellaneous luggage into ‘loads’ was
the hardest we had yet encountered.

It _sounds_ so simple, but I have never met any single traveller in this
country who, having once endured the ordeal—I can call it nothing else—of
‘animal transport,’ ever willingly repeated the experience! And indeed
it is, or should be, apparent to the least observant that the caravan
transport is one thing, and an Englishman’s luggage is another. I have
watched hundreds of times the arrival of caravans at their camp for
the night: the weight of the loads (salt, potash, kolas, cloth, etc.)
is regulated to an ounce, each one is packed in _exact_ similarity to
its fellow in size and shape, so that the two form a perfectly equally
balanced burden, which never slips, falls, nor worries the donkey;
moreover, once packed, so they remain, the tremendous web of string,
knotted and turned, twisted and knotted again, holds good for the entire
journey. On arrival, the two loads are simply lifted off the donkey’s
back, deposited on the ground and the _leferu_ on which they rest, laid
beside them. In the morning, the pillow is replaced, and the same loads
laid on it—the whole process taking less than five minutes.

Now observe the unfortunate European traveller! He will naturally look
round, as far as he can, for loads of an equal size, and, with luck, will
discover a couple of similar uniform cases. But who can guarantee that
the contents of each weigh exactly the same amount? Indeed, are there any
two boxes among his ‘kit’ that do? With muscular carriers, six or even
ten pounds more or less make little difference; here, it means that the
heavier box over-balances the other, drags the pillow, and incites the
donkey to quietly scrape against the nearest tree, relieving himself of
the whole thing—small blame to him!—and the crash of falling loads is a
sound only too familiar to any one who has travelled in this way.

The wayfarer next hunts round among his possessions, and wonders how he
is to unite any two of a folding bath, a camp chair, a Lord’s lantern, a
tent and an open box of cooking pots, into equal-sized and shaped loads.
The answer may, and should be, arrived at without any of the mental
strain usually devoted to it, for it is quite simple—_it cannot be done_!

The wretched little animals are small and weakly at the best, and, since
even in the caravans, with short marches and the ‘perfect’ load, they
acquire terrible sore backs, the employment of them with ill-balanced
odd-shaped burdens is simply gross cruelty. I shudder now when I remember
our donkeys’ backs, washed, dressed and cared for as they were, with
the utmost tenderness. Another serious drawback is that they travel far
more slowly than carriers; indeed, the caravans hardly ever do more than
eight or ten miles a day, and the ‘trek ox’ proceeds even more leisurely!
Unless each animal has its own driver, the accidents are incessant, and
the delay maddening, for what can be done by the driver of five, when one
donkey casts its loads and skips off into the bush? Is he to leave the
remainder of his charge, knowing as he does, for a certainty, that those
he leaves will immediately do likewise? Having captured the runaway,
how is he, unaided, to get two awkward sixty-pound loads into their
former position? It means that the traveller, his servants, escort and
staff are all compelled to crawl at the rate of two-and-a-half miles an
hour, with probably twenty miles to cover before water can be reached.
Many and many a grilling half-hour have we both spent in this agreeable
occupation; personally I preferred catching the donkeys, in spite of the
heat, to adjusting my battered belongings on their shrinking backs! I can
safely say we had more of our possessions lost and destroyed during our
journey to Katāgum and back, than we have lost in the whole of our five
years out in Africa!

On the return journey the pack oxen were our greatest trial; they had an
inveterate habit of lying down, loads and all, in any shallow river they
crossed, and once a pack ox lies down ‘all the king’s horses and all the
king’s men’ will not move him an inch until he has recovered from his
fatigue. One of our largest and best defeated us in this fashion in a
village, and no method we could devise, including the whole strength of
the village, and even, in despair, a flicker of fire just under his nose,
had the slightest effect, the latter device merely producing a faint
smell of scorch, so horrible in its suggestion that we flew to stamp it
out, and hurriedly sold the delinquent to the villagers, who, seeing us
at a distinct disadvantage in the matter, made an uncommonly good bargain
for themselves!

By ten o’clock on December 15 we had begun to get an inkling of what lay
before us; the whole of the donkeys had straggled out of the compound, we
said our last good-byes and followed them—only to find most of the loads
scattered on the road, not fifty yards away, and the donkeys careering
gladly back to their happy homes! Patience, patience, and yet more
patience! There is really nothing else for it—fury only exhausts one, and
does not catch the donkeys!

Eventually we got off, and were fairly started on the long white road,
trending south-east, winding in and out on a dead level, among miles of
farms and hamlets. Barth has remarked that ‘the Province of Kano may
truly be called the garden of Central Africa,’ and to us it appeared
marvellously fertile, especially at that season of the year, when every
river-bed was dry, and the whole land waterless, save for an occasional
well.

One evening we had rather an interesting experience: among our party we
numbered a ‘political agent,’ Ganna by name, and a strict Mahomedan,
an interpreter called Daniel, a Christian convert with more zeal than
tact or knowledge, and a Senegalese soldier, Braima, who had become a
fast friend of mine, marching always beside my pony, and giving me his
opinions on things in general, in his queerly pronounced French, while he
contentedly munched away at my kola-nuts which I scrupulously shared with
him. He had served with the French troops in Dahomey, and his stories of
their proceedings were most amusing, if slightly startling! His affection
for us became so strong that, before we severed our connexion, he
cheerfully offered to desert from the N.N.R. for my benefit, on condition
that I would install him as ‘head boy,’ and was quite mournful when shown
the impracticability of his suggestion!

In an idle moment, these three men had embarked on a theological
discussion, and, like their enlightened and highly civilized white
brethren in England, got so heated and furious in their argument that
Ganna only averted bloodshed by a happy suggestion that they should all
come to us and let us arbitrate.

Daniel had first say. He commenced by a sweeping denunciation of all
Mahomedans, and, incidentally, such dogs of heathen as Senegalese and
such like. Their hearts and consciences were of the blackest, he informed
us; and drew vivid pictures of their final fate and destination. On
being sharply pulled up, and told to confine himself to his own creed,
he unctuously explained as follows: ‘Well, God is a kind of a scorpion.
When man do bad, he turn up him tail—so—and bite him _proper_! If man do
good, then God just lef (leave) him!’ Ganna’s creed was too well known
to us to require explaining at length, and the soldier added little to
the discussion except furious indignation against Daniel for having
stigmatized him as a dog and a heathen. His own ‘views’ were ill-defined,
I fancy, except for a strong sense of personal loyalty and affection, and
a fatal passion for a row of any kind!

We then set to work to place before them all Christianity pure and
simple, untainted by creed or dogma, the plain doctrine of one God and
Father of all, Christian and Mahomedan, black and white, and every
living creature, whether known as ‘Allah’, ‘God,’ or ‘Le Bon Dieu.’ They
seemed curiously astonished at such a pronouncement, Ganna receiving
it with deep-voiced ‘Gaskia ne! Gaskia ne! Mahad Allah!’ (True, true,
thank God!) Braima, staring into the fire and grunting, ‘C’est ça!’ at
intervals; while Daniel sniffed suspiciously and with some contempt.
He retired finally with his smug complacency quite unshaken, evidently
considering our doctrines milk-and-water affairs compared with his own
fiery ultimatums!

This little episode reminded my husband of another, which took place
some years ago in Accra, when his ‘boy’, a Christian, having learned to
read at school, delighted to read Bible stories aloud to the orderly,
and on this occasion selected ‘Jonah and the Whale’ for his instruction.
The orderly listened with round eyes and growing incredulity, and at the
conclusion remarked emphatically: ‘That be dam lie!’ ‘Dam lie? You say
that? Dis be _Bible_—if you say Bible be lie, you go hell one time!’
‘Don’t care!’ said the orderly doggedly, ‘P’raps I go hell, I don’t know,
but I no fit to believe that story—dam lie!’

The outraged little reader trotted off with his Bible under his arm, and
wrath in his heart!

After a few days’ marching through rather uninteresting country, level,
sandy and treeless, we climbed on to a sandy ridge which looked exactly
as if it _must_ have the sea behind it, and continued our way along the
top for nine or ten miles, in deep sand, most fatiguing to men and ponies
alike:

    Toiling in immeasurable sand
    O’er a weary, sultry land,
    Far beneath a blazing vault.

There was a wonderful view on either side, miles and miles of plain, all
sand, low bushes and scanty grass—a veritable sea of grey-green fading
into pale blue in the far distance. When the eye became accustomed to the
vast sweep of green, one discovered innumerable tiny hamlets and farms,
all neatly fenced, and growing healthy crops of cotton and cassava,
apparently in pure sand. It was a remarkable sight, and seemed to be the
very edge of the Desert. I could image it being brilliantly beautiful in
the rainy season, but in December, with everything enveloped in a dismal
hot grey-drab mist, the scene was depressing and gloomy to a degree. Far
apart were isolated wells, some presenting quite a Biblical appearance,
with the waiting herds and flocks, and white-robed figures.

As we entered the Katāgum Province, the country changed to light
woodland, a great relief, and pleasant to march through, had it not
been for the truly terrible thorns. The trees were mostly mimosa and
camel-thorn in full blossom, the sickly-sweet scent of which is most
unpleasant and powerful. The last march into Katāgum was like entering a
new country, as rich and fertile as the last had been barren and dreary.

We arrived on Christmas Eve, and felt great satisfaction at not being
obliged to spend Christmas Day on the road. The Acting Resident was
waiting to welcome us, and we took possession of a ‘house’ of grass
matting, built round an immense Kuka tree, the trunk of which formed one
entire side. It was very spacious and really exceedingly comfortable but
for the presence of some highly objectionable large black ants, the smell
of which, should they be disturbed or crushed accidentally, was so truly
awful as to drive us all—dogs included—out into the open air to recover!
We had some really cold nights, when the temperature dropped to 54°,
and regularly, each morning, a strong chilly wind would spring up about
seven, and last till ten o’clock, when it sank away quite suddenly, and
usually some extremely hot hours followed.

From our doorway we could look for miles around, over a plain of waving
grass, dotted with palm trees, mainly the Egyptian Doum palm with its
curious bifurcations. The town was about a mile from our settlement, and
the river wound away to the south-west, bordered with brilliant green
patches of wheat and onions. Game of all kinds was very plentiful at that
time; we could always see the deer roaming fearlessly about, and, evening
after evening, we used to ride out in different directions, and had
capital sport.

My own small occupations were of quite a different nature from my usual
hobbies; gardening at this season of the year was, of course, out of the
question, but we had succeeded in conveying a few Black Minorca fowls
from England, and they behaved splendidly, laying well all the time—even
on the march, every day, we found one or two eggs in the basket! The
care of a farm-yard was quite a novelty to me. I found it a fascinating
occupation—one that grows upon one, too. We also revelled in rich milk,
and every morning I amused myself by making butter in a small plunge
churn, which I had brought with me. It was very excellent butter, and I
was equally proud of my cream cheeses! But my efforts to manage cows,
calves, and herdsmen after the manner of an English dairy, were a dismal
failure, and I gave them up, submitting meekly, but much against my will,
to the ‘custom of the country!’

The Katāgum people were specially pleasant to deal with: half Fulani,
half Beri-beri,—a combination which seems to make for unusual
intelligence, coupled with admirable spirit and innate courtesy. They
made friends at once, and the Sariki and his immediate followers were
my almost daily visitors. On one of these visits, with a sort of shy
reproach he touched the skirt of my coloured linen frock, and asked
gently why, when I came to his house to see him, I did not wear pretty
clothes like that—his people only saw me in a black _gown_ (my habit!)
After that I had to sacrifice comfort to friendship, and be careful to
ride into the town in my lightest muslin!

On another occasion, the Sariki explained to me that, as I had evidently
been ‘sent’ to them as a special mark of favour, it was quite necessary
for them to know my name;—what should they call me? ‘A man’s name,’ I
remarked, ‘is given to him by his friends. Give me a name yourselves,’
After cogitating in whispers, the old man said, smiling, that they would
in future know me as ‘Uwāmu’ (Our Mother), and so I received my ‘country’
name, one that has stuck to me ever since, and by which I am known to all
my dark-skinned friends throughout Nigeria. I am always proud of it, for
though, at the time, I felt inclined to smile at being so addressed by
men old enough to be my father, the title is recognized to be the highest
expression of respect and affection that the African man can offer to a
woman.

We were presented with a pair of tame marabouts, but their tameness
was a doubtful quantity; and though it was amusing enough to see them
dancing and playing about in the sunshine, their temper was not of the
best, and they attacked every one who approached the house, snapping
their formidable beaks angrily. The poor dogs were in absolute terror
of them, and would warily wait their opportunity outside, till the
marabouts’ attention was distracted, when a white streak of fox-terrier
would fly in, only just escaping the furious beating of wings and
clapping of beaks! They were so tiresome that we parted with them, and
replaced them by a baby ostrich, which we bought for a sovereign: a
most attractive little person, about the size of a duck, a mere ball
of soft, mouse-coloured fluff, with beautiful velvety black eyes, and
long _eyelashes_! It had never occurred to me before, that ostriches
had eyelashes! His diet consisted mainly of chopped-up onions and bran,
though he fulfilled the traditions of his race—and alarmed me horribly—by
swallowing all kinds of weird things. I have seen him devour with relish
all the pieces of a broken glass bangle; and any odd bits of china,
stone, or metal appeared to be equally tasty morsels. He became very tame
at once, and would wander about freely, and sometimes stand beside me for
an hour at a time, gently nipping at my sleeve or slippers.

Life in this rural retreat, however, did not last long, and the end of
January found us under orders to return to Zungeru, and, very sadly,
packing once more. We started, after infinite difficulty, as usual
over transport, which delayed us so long eventually that the sun was
uncomfortably high before we said our farewells and rode away from
Katāgum. We had a guide to set us on the road to Murmur, a different
route from that by which we had reached Katāgum, and he either misled
us, or was ignorant himself, for, after his last asseveration of ‘Oh! it
is _quite_ near now!’ and subsequent departure, we marched for hours,
losing the almost imperceptible path, finding it again, after collecting
our straggling party—a matter of some difficulty—all thirsty, tired and
grumbling, calling down Heaven’s vengeance on the perfidious guide, and
eventually reached Murmur after sunset.

It was a curious coincidence that we found ourselves on the spot where
Richard Oudney died, exactly eighty years before (January, 1824),
striving, in spite of desperate illness, to reach Kano, in company with
Clapperton. The latter describes the sad events—Oudney’s determination
to make a further effort, insisting on resuming the journey, for which
he was quite unfit, ministering to the needs of the natives with what
was absolutely his last flicker of strength, then reluctantly giving up
the impossible, ‘retiring into his tent’ and lying down to die. There,
Clapperton buried his beloved friend, and we were deeply interested in
the site of his resting-place. The village people were quite touchingly
surprised and delighted when we repeated the story to them; it was
obviously a familiar one. The Sariki’s father had been a boy at the time,
but such a remarkable event was not likely to be forgotten, and they
started, as one man, to conduct us to the grave. It may be remembered
that Clapperton gives minute details of its position, which accorded
exactly with the spot to which we were led, leaving no possible doubt of
its accuracy. The ‘great tree’ had fallen, and the tomb, originally a
massive erection of clay, had been worn down by rain to an insignificant
mound, round which we planted a circle of seeds of the fragrant white
acacia, or _marengo_, in the earnest hope that they might grow and stand,
for many years, a memorial to the honour of that brave unselfish soul.

At Murmur, a grave difficulty presented itself. The people told us
we were off the main road altogether, the wells were almost dry, and
we could not hope to find enough water for our party and animals
between there and Kano, save on the regular caravan road, joining
which necessitated our turning north and marching to Hadeija, a large
town twenty miles north of Katāgum. It was not a matter to be lightly
decided, adding even twenty-five miles to a march as long as ours; yet,
the responsibility of taking a large party of men and animals through
a waterless district was one from which most people would shrink, so
we assembled the whole party, explained the situation, and frankly
consulted them. They unanimously voted for the extra march to Hadeija,
knowing, I suppose, better than we did, the utter impossibility of
obtaining sufficient food and water anywhere ‘off the line;’ and probably
influenced by the fact that the carriers from Katāgum bolted in the
night, giving as their reason for so doing their determination not to
‘die of thirst.’

The decision relieved us of an immense anxiety, and we started cheerfully
for Hadeija, sleeping that night at a tiny hamlet, where we were met and
welcomed by the Emir’s messengers.

The following morning we reached Hadeija, and the scene, on our approach
to the town, was one that I shall never forget. There was the vast extent
of rose-red wall, swarming with dark figures, the river flowing between
us and the town, and, on the far bank,—a space of nearly half a mile—a
dense mass of people watching with intense interest and expectancy. They
stood, an absolutely silent, swaying crowd, as we picked our way down the
steep bank, crossed the shallow river, and scrambled our ponies up the
other side. There we saw a pathway in the crowd kept by troops—positively
_cavalry_, four or five hundred of them,—drawn up in two double lines,
rigid and motionless in their saddles, the horses loaded with jingling
brass armour, heavy breast-plates and head-pieces, neighing, squealing
and kicking, but forced to stand comparatively still, merely pawing the
ground and tossing foam from their tortured mouths; stirrup touching
stirrup with a military precision that would not have disgraced any
regiment of British cavalry. The soldiers were fine big men, splendidly
turned out, and sat like living statues, but for the bright, restless
black eyes, between the folds of white cloth _litham_, following our
every movement. I doubt, though, whether any one there could have been
half as much interested in us, as I was myself at seeing this spectacle
of truly barbaric African splendour, riding behind my husband, feeling
_very_ small, travel-stained and dusty, amid so much brilliance and
colour! It seemed to take one back centuries in the world’s civilization,
and, with a gasp, came the realization that we had stepped into a world
where time had stood still, and the ages passed over without leaving a
mark!

At the end of the long line of horsemen was a little group of the chief
office-holders, surrounding their Emir, who, as we dismounted, approached
to greet us. He was a large, powerfully-built man, with the kindliest of
faces, and the gentlest voice I have ever heard; his quiet tones, almost
a whisper, veiling an authority, the response to which, in its instant
obedience and child-like submission, was quite startling.

His voluminous garments of brilliant green and white, and towering white
_rawani_, or turban, were surmounted by a burnous of white cloth, the
hood of which, edged with silk fringe, drawn over the tall head-dress and
falling round his face, gave him a positively patriarchal expression of
benevolence and kindliness. The courteous, dignified cordiality of our
welcome was perfect, and, the ceremonial greetings over, we were escorted
to the rest-camp prepared for us outside the city. Here, a regular little
colony of grass houses had been built, large enough to accommodate a
party twice the size of ours: water, wood and provisions were ready;
not a comfort was lacking, not a detail had been overlooked. My friend,
the Senegalese soldier, having, as he frankly said, no experience of
such friendly visits while he served in the French army, harboured
suspicions of an ambush and treachery, and displayed, at first, a fierce
determination not to let us out of his sight;—suspicions which, however,
were completely dissipated when he discovered the unbounded, lavish
hospitality offered to him and his companions!

In the cool of the evening, we walked into the city, and were amazed at
the solidity and immense size of the wall, the area inferior to Kano,
but, in point of height and condition, greatly superior. The gateways
were huge, and so cunningly arranged with rectangular approaches that
no armed force could possibly rush them,—indeed, no more than three or
four men at a time could cross the narrow bridges, and, were any attempt
at defence being made inside these would probably not cross them alive.
The gates themselves had been removed, in obedience to an order issued
by my husband, while we were at Katāgum, and Hadeija, the impregnable,
the unconquered, stood friendly, smiling, open to all approach,—surely
a happy omen for the future for increased prosperity and uninterrupted
progress, we thought,—a hope, alas! not destined to be fulfilled.

Inside the gate by which we entered was an extensive space of open
ground and level turf, where the cattle were quietly grazing, and the
people passing up and down; far away in the distance were the buildings,
flushed in the sunset, overtopped by towering trees and clusters of
feathery palms. It was a sore disappointment to have to turn away
without exploring that unknown city, to turn my back on Hadeija, a
mere passing traveller, knowing that the chances of my seeing it again
were infinitesimal,—to me, it has always been the most poignant regret
of these five years spent in Nigeria. I am thankful not to have known
then, that so soon those peaceful streets would echo with war-cries, and
bloodshed and death be dealt out with a just, though unsparing hand,
for the sake of civilization and progress. I had just time to try to
make a hurried pencil-sketch of the scene before me, and the gate. This,
however, was rendered almost impossible by the friendly surging crowd,
by that time assembled,—all longing to know what in the world I was
doing, chattering, peeping, pressing forward—not mobbing, though—that
delicate attention is reserved for highly civilized countries; in Africa
it is ‘not done!’ So I gave up the attempt in amused despair, showed my
pictures to as many of my new friends as I could reach, and shut up my
sketch-book to take a last look at one of the most fascinating places of
its kind that I have ever seen.

The next morning we were up early, teeth chattering, and shivering in
the bitter chill of the winter dawn, in spite of a huge wood fire.
The Emir had announced his intention of escorting us on our way, to a
point seven miles from Hadeija, adding with emphasis, that, when the
Sariki-n-Mussulmi passed through, he only accompanied him _five_ miles!
He clattered off, surrounded by his army of horsemen and an apparently
unlimited crowd on foot, leaving us to digest the compliment, and drink
our morning coffee over the fire.

We found them all assembled under a group of trees. As we dismounted,
the horsemen formed up into a gigantic double circle, ourselves, the
Emir, his head men, and a few of our own people in the centre. When the
last farewells had been said, my husband asked that the Limam might offer
prayers for our safe journey, and—perhaps—another meeting some day, a
suggestion which evoked a deep murmur of satisfaction. The ‘cavalry’
dismounted and stood beside their horses, the Limam stood up, his
towering white head-dress and earnest dark face turned to the morning
sun, his solemn clear voice pouring out the prayer in sonorous Arabic,
every word distinct in the great silence; thousands of heads and hands
around followed every gesture, our own included, for, at that strange
moment creeds seemed very far away, and the one Father of us all, to whom
such earnest words were being addressed on our behalf, the sole reality.
It was a sight, I suppose, such as few people have ever witnessed, and it
made a very deep and lasting impression on us. I had a lump in my throat
when, as I turned to mount my pony, the stately old Emir laid his slender
brown hand, with a beautiful amber rosary twined among the fingers, on
my arm, and said gently: ‘You will come back to us; surely God will send
you back,’ And perhaps not the least remarkable incident was, when, as we
turned our horses’ heads, our escort, those who had been most suspicious,
most incredulous of our host’s good intentions, asked leave, to a man,
to fall out and obtain the Limam’s blessing, kneeling humbly at his
stirrup!

[Illustration: BRINGING IN FIRE-WOOD. (p. 103)]

[Illustration: A KANO DOORWAY. (p. 107)]

The whole circumstances of our visit to Hadeija, compared with the stormy
events which took place there two years later, are illustrative of a
point, we have frequently noticed, on hearing accounts of the peaceful
journeys of missionaries and sportsmen, and of the perfect hospitality
and friendliness they have found everywhere: that it is one thing to
travel independently through the unknown parts of Africa, and quite
another to administrate them successfully, introducing, of necessity,
unpopular measures, and restraining undesirable existing customs. One
acquaintance of ours, travelling about in search of sport, has wandered
all through the Munshi country, where the natives have proved themselves
aggressive and inimical to a degree towards any effort to establish law
and order. This is a fact, I think, commonly overlooked by those who,
with insufficient knowledge of the immense difficulties confronting
a Government in territories such as these, are inclined to condemn
wholesale and belittle the necessity of punitive expeditions and display
of force.

From Hadeija our march was perfectly ‘plain sailing,’ The Emir’s
messenger went before us and smoothed away every possible difficulty,
only leaving us on the border of the Kano Province.

One incident of the road which stands out in my memory was the ludicrous
struggles of our old cook, Jim Dow, to become an expert horseman, and to
fully enjoy the privilege of having a horse to ride. He had bought an
extremely tall horse, attracted more by its utter mildness of disposition
than by any other remarkable point of suitability. Having saddled up
his depressed-looking steed, he, being a dumpy little individual, under
five feet in height, could not possibly mount without assistance. This
he indignantly spurned, and would solemnly lead the horse, till he
discovered a likely-looking tree. The horse was placed conveniently
under it, and the little man clumsily and slowly climbed into the lower
branches, from which he hoped to drop gracefully into the saddle. But
the sad steed invariably strolled off in an absent-minded fashion at the
critical moment, leaving poor Jim Dow hanging painfully from a branch,
and using blistering language in ‘Kru’! I have seen this manœuvre
repeated four or five times on a march, and he was a never-failing source
of amusement to the whole party!

We reached Kano on Sunday, the 7th of February, having decided to sleep
the night before at a tiny village a few miles out, as one of our
ponies had broken loose and could not be re-captured until late in the
afternoon. This small mishap was extremely fortunate for us, as a matter
of fact, as we afterwards heard that at the very hour when, had we not
been delayed, we should have ridden up to the Residency gate at Kano, a
curious and unpleasant scene was taking place there.

A native soldier had been confined in the guard-room on account of
insolence and insubordination. While there, he coolly possessed
himself of a rifle and a pouch full of ammunition, and darted out of
the guard-room, the bewildering suddenness of his action apparently
paralysing the guard for the moment. He rushed out on to the parade
ground, shrieking vengeance on all ‘Batures’ (Englishmen), calling to
them to come and be shot, brandishing his rifle,—evidently quite insane
and ‘running amok.’ Taking careful aim, he shot dead five horses tethered
in the shade, belonging to his officers, and his shooting was so straight
that most natural reluctance was displayed by his comrades in the matter
of his re-capture. He actually sent a bullet through the doorway of
the hospital hut, possibly seeing some one moving there. Finally the
unfortunate lunatic was shot down, having been successfully ‘stalked’
from behind trees and other cover. It was a nasty occurrence, and much
relief was expressed at our non-appearance at such an awkward moment.

On arrival we found every one very sad and anxious about Captain
Abadie, who was lying very ill. He did not improve during the two days
we spent there, and, shortly after leaving, we heard, to our sorrow,
of his death,—a loss to Nigeria and his friends which could never be
over-estimated.

At Zaria we met many old friends, but stayed one night only, as we were
anxious to lose no time in getting down country. It was wretched there
then, in a tent, with a strong Harmattan blowing clouds of sand into our
eyes, filling every crevice, and covering our food before we had time to
eat it, even with the greatest expediency!

At Karshi we had the good fortune to meet Captain Robinson and Major
Porter, going North. We had tea with them at their camp, outside the
town, and in the evening they came and dined with us, only stipulating
that they should be allowed to contribute to the feast; and I shall
always remember the procession that preceded the arrival of our
guests,—‘boys’ carrying chairs, lanterns, Lager beer in buckets of
cold water, roast guinea-fowls, and a box of chocolates! We had a most
cheery dinner, and sat talking into the small hours, and even managed
to breakfast all together the next morning before going our several
ways. It is one of the pleasantest of my many pleasant memories in this
country,—the spontaneous friendly kindness of two complete strangers, as
they were then, coming at a time when most needed, for our spirits were
almost as low as our provisions, and the bull-terrier pup had distemper!
I do not suppose the two people concerned realized then, or do now, what
a difference they made in our outlook on life at that time,—if not, I
make them a present of the information now!

On the 28th of February, we found ourselves once more in Zungeru. A
vacant bungalow was lent to us, and we spent a few days there very
comfortably, in spite of the excessive heat. We heard with dismay of the
terrible disaster in the Bassa country, where Captain O’Riordan and Mr.
Burney lost their lives. My husband received orders to take over the
Kabba Province once again, and we started on the last stage of our long
journey. The noisy little train rattled us back to Barijuko; we embarked
in a steel canoe, and commenced to paddle and drift down the Kaduna. The
river was very low, and we stuck continually on the sandbanks, when the
polers all turned out into the water, not more than seven or eight inches
deep, and literally dug out the canoe till she was once more afloat.
We were overtaken the next day by a second canoe, containing Captain
Wright (who had won a V.C. in the Kano Expedition) invalided, home, and
three others. Each evening we ‘tied up’ in company, and had cheerful
‘sand-bank’ dinner-parties. It was very placid and delightful travelling;
I suppose we were both rather tired, and, for the first time in my life,
I found huge enjoyment in doing absolutely nothing, beyond watching the
river banks and sunlit water.

At Mureji there was quite a gathering, and—a thing unknown—a collection
of five ladies! Dr. and Mrs. Thompstone were there, on their way to
Zungeru, and three Nursing Sisters, travelling up and down. We met some
old friends, and were quite a gay party, but it was a sad day for me,—my
beloved baby ostrich was suddenly taken ill, wandering about as usual, on
the bank, and, in spite of the greatest kindness shown me by Dr. Miller
of the C.M.S., who was on board, the poor little bird died in a few
hours. It seemed piteous indeed, when he had travelled so far without a
single mishap, and I was bitterly grieved at the loss.

It was, however, a great delight, under any circumstances, to see the
Niger again; as the _Corona_ sped down stream, every bush and rock seemed
familiar, and to be welcoming us ‘home’ to Lokoja. We settled down in
our former bungalow, and, in a few weeks, I could hardly believe that we
had travelled all those hundreds of miles in the past six months. The
much-talked-of North country had considerably disappointed us in its
appearance; and, with the exception of Kano and Hadeija, I think I can
safely say that neither of us has the least desire to see any part of it
again.




CHAPTER VIII

Kabba, Semolika and Patti Abaja


It was not until the end of July that I found myself ‘touring’ once
again, when we started for Kabba. It was interesting and pleasant
going over the same ground that we had covered two years before; and
characteristic of the country that there was not a single change to
be noticed on the road: the little Hausa farm, somewhat expanded,
perhaps; Oduapi as loud and genial as ever, with the blue and green gown
apparently standing the test of time and wear most satisfactorily!

At Kabba things were altered for the better. The old quarters had
been pulled down and new ones built; police barracks had sprung into
existence; and a general air of progress and prosperity was there. We
stayed a few weeks, and the place took such a hold on our affections,
that, at the risk of appearing sentimental, I will give some description
of it here. My enthusiasm is the more excusable when I recall that the
High Commissioner himself expressed unqualified admiration for Kabba,
even after his long tour, during which he had visited nearly every part
of the Protectorate.

It is, in itself a small and insignificant town in the centre of the
Province, it is not on the way to anywhere in particular—anywhere, that
is, that draws the stream of Europeans so ceaselessly passing up and down
the highways of the Protectorate; it has no great political importance to
drag it into prominence, no Emirate, with all the pomp and circumstance
attending a powerful native ruler; it has none of the halo of mystery
and attraction which hovers over Kano, Sokoto and the North generally;
nor is it on the path of the immense caravans which throng the Northern
routes. These either end their journey at Ilorin, and return North,
laden with fresh merchandise, or else, passing down through Nassarawa,
divide themselves into small canoe-loads, when they meet the Niger at
Loko. Kabba only sees those humble traders, who, in twos and threes, are
carrying native-made cloth to Lokoja, or returning with loads of potash;
in fact, the little place just sits there, a tiny mouse-coloured town,
snugly tucked away on the slopes of a thickly wooded hill-side, in one
of the very quietest backwaters of all the world’s rushing and scurrying
tide.

[Illustration: MUREJI—A CARAVAN ABOUT TO CROSS THE NIGER. (p. 110)]

[Illustration: A STEAM CANOE ON THE NIGER. (p. 116)]

Picture to yourself a green—truly emerald green—plain, holding an
area of, roughly, ten square miles, dotted with palm-trees (_Elaeis
guineensis_), their tall slender stems crowned with crests of graceful
drooping plumes, and bearing a respectable fortune in the palm-oil
contained in the closely clustering bunches of nuts on each tree.
Hundreds of acres are under cultivation, mainly yams, cotton and
capsicums, the last-named glowing like little tongues of flame among
the glossy winding trails of the yams, which, at a distance, resemble
smilax on a magnificent scale. Away, beyond, rise the blue hills, in a
huge circle, jealously shutting in this little green paradise from the
tiresome world of restless white folks, who would take count of time,
make roads, try to introduce sanitation, and otherwise employ themselves
in fruitless and unnecessary works to the dire discomfort of the peaceful
denizens of peaceful places! The ancient wall stretches away across the
plain, enclosing an area of which Kabba town to-day occupies possibly
one-hundredth part. A second inner boundary wall surrounds the town
proper, excluding the steep little hill crowned by the Fort, which is
now in as bad a state of repair as the aged walls themselves, but which,
three years ago, was nevertheless the abiding-place of a small military
detachment, and a handful of native police, in fact, the English Quarter
of Kabba, whence might be heard any morning ringing words of command
in English, bugle-calls all day long, and at evening-time the native
sentry challenging all and sundry with ‘Holl!-who-go-thaire!’ in his most
awe-inspiring tone. This ‘English Quarter’ was the only aspect of Kabba
that had the power of damping my spirits, beside the literal and visible
damping of our belongings which took place pretty regularly. Our quarters
were a rambling, ill-constructed clay building, measuring a good sixty
feet from end to end; the crumbling mud walls and ant-eaten, collapsing
wooden supports surmounted by a painfully inadequate thatched roof.
This house, incredible as it may seem, was designed by an Englishman,
whose desire for spaciousness and magnificence of proportion evidently
outweighed his knowledge of elementary architecture, and blinded his
foresight. How the native labourers must have smiled, and patiently
shrugged their shoulders, as they piled up the ridiculous structure under
his imperious orders!

Meantime, the tornadoes swept up over the hills to the South and West,
tearing like a white wall across the plain, and wreaking their fury on
this ill-fated hill-top in a most thorough-going fashion. At such a time
it made one giddy to look up at the roof, while it creaked and swayed
horribly in the hurricane, each gust seeming to bring the inevitable
collapse nearer. We had spent rainy seasons in Africa before, so we took
no needless risks, and in the places most essential for our comfort,
we rigged up tents and ground-sheets, thus securing to ourselves and a
percentage of our belongings islands of comparative safety and dryness;
but, for the rest...! I never could help smiling at the sight of the
Sahib, manfully getting through his day’s work, interviewing the chiefs
and headmen of various neighbouring villages, with the rain pouring
through the roof, and an umbrella held over his head, while his guests
squatted around him, placidly enduring the ceaseless streams of water
pattering on their persons, and displaying as much polite cheerfulness as
the circumstances would permit.

Kabba itself is much the same as any of the smaller towns in the
Protectorate in appearance; a collection of clay-built thatched houses,
clustered closely together, seeming to cling affectionately to the
rocky hill-side above—the Ju-ju Hill, deeply reverenced, dearly loved,
and jealously guarded by all. There is the usual crowded market, with
low, dark booths or shelters lining the streets, where the ladies of
commercial pursuits display the invariable collection of coloured cotton
cloths, beads, miscellaneous food-stuffs, spices and capsicums. They are
some of the most light-hearted and spirited women I have met, those at
Kabba. As I rode through the busy market heads would be popped out, and
white teeth flash in smiles, calling merry greetings to ‘Uwāmu,’ and
vociferating warnings to the fat brown toddlers, rapt in wonder, and
straying perilously near my horse’s hoofs. They are dear, simple souls,
untouched by civilization, happy and unspoilt as little children, yet
self-reliant and independent withal. A scene illustrative of this was
enacted before me daily while at Kabba: the open space in front of our
quarters bathed in warm sunlight; above, blue sky and wheeling kites;
below, the valley, stretching away into purple distance. Little groups
of people, humble folk, trading in a small way between Lagos and the
Hausa States, carrying country-made cloth, palm-oil, salt and kola-nuts,
turned in here daily to disburse, with cheerful reluctance, the small
percentage then levied on each load as a caravan tax. Those moving in
the same direction were, of course, travelling acquaintances. Many were
women, and the babble of laughter and chatter in various tongues was
incessant. The tender-hearted philanthropist would have to seek far and
long in this merry crowd for the ‘down-trodden women of Africa’ and the
‘black sister in slavery’, of whom one seems to have heard. There is not
much that indicates subjection or fear about these ladies, sitting at
graceful ease among their loads, or strolling about in the hot sunshine,
polished mahogany shoulders gleaming, white teeth flashing in laughter,
while the slender perfectly-shaped hands gesticulate dramatically,
illustrating the incident of absorbing interest, which is being related
in musical sing-song Nupe, almost like a Gregorian chant in its slow
cadences. The outer garment, consisting of a gaily-tinted country-made
cloth, wrapped tightly round the body, just below the arms, is adjusted,
tightened, tucked in with lightning rapidity, and precision. The “black
sister” has a word, a joke, a stream of courteous greetings for every
individual there. As each new arrival appears upon the scene, a chorus
of salutations in Hausa, Nupe and Yoruba meets him; a dozen kindly hands
are stretched out to help him down with his heavy load; endless inquiries
are pressed upon him as to his health, the comfort of his journey, the
state of the road, etc.; and he becomes at once an honoured guest in
the cheerful coterie. Every departing traveller has the same circle of
willing friends, eager to help him to adjust his sixty or eighty pounds
of merchandise, and start him off on a fresh stage of his journey with a
shower of valedictions, good wishes and pious ejaculations and prayers
for his safety,—his replies borne faintly up to us on the warm air, as he
drops down the steep path into the valley below.

Of course, it may be called merely superficial friendliness and courtesy,
and it is quite possible that, while the latest arrival absents himself
for ten minutes or so, discoursing to the Resident, the speckled chicken
which erstwhile dangled by one leg and a piece of string from his load
_may_ not be there when he returned, and may be adorning the baggage of
the astute trader, who has just left with some alacrity; but, even so,
for myself, I would gladly take the chance of having my pocket picked,
if, on one of the many occasions when I have entered a crowded omnibus
in London, one of the row of cold, critical unfriendly faces opposite
would break into a smile, and say what I heard all round me at Kabba,
in sonorous Yoruba: ‘Akwabo! Akwabo!’ (You are welcome, very welcome!)
Indeed, I can never conquer that curious feeling of chilly depression
that overtakes me each time I return to England, and feel that, except
for the tiny minority of my own friends, I am alone in the crowd;
infinitely more alone in Bond Street, where almost every brick and stone
is familiar, than I could ever be in the busy streets of Kano, or any
other city of Nigeria, which I might enter even for the first time, where
I should find two hands and one willing tongue all inadequate for the
due return of the ceaseless shower of smiling salutations and greetings
that would be poured upon me from every side. And this is by no means a
tribute to any personal charms of mine. Any traveller, black-skinned or
white, receives the same treatment as a matter of course.

It is, however, a ‘far cry’ from Bond Street to Kabba, and I very much
doubt whether moralizing is permissible in so small and simple a record
as this. It must have been—as usual—the fault of those chattering ladies!

Outside the town, there is a little stretch of forest belt, and, as no
one has ever disputed its possession with me, I am pleased to consider
it exclusively my own property! The path is of the very narrowest, not
more than three feet anywhere, giving barely room enough for me and
my pony. On either side rises a wall of greenery, full of climbing
plants innumerable. Hanging from the branches of great trees, twenty and
thirty feet above my head, themselves loaded with ferns and parasites,
are gracefully twining creepers, swaying tantalizingly and rather
contemptuously, it seems, just out of reach of my farthest stretch. Two
months before, it was a flaming mass of glorious scarlet _Mussaenda
elegans_. Now, in July, that has passed, and the mode for the month is
a flower I dearly love, but which, owing to a miserable ignorance of
botany, I cannot address by its proper name. I think it would strike the
lay mind as a species of mimosa. The stem is thorny; the leaves, which
are minutely pinnate, close modestly at sunset. The flower smells of
a thousand sweet things, and consists of a collection of tiny florets
massed together, forming one infinitely delicate ball of slender,
silvery-white threads tipped with golden pollen. It is everywhere,
clasping the tree-trunks, foaming over the bushes, and shrouding the deep
cool recesses, where the shining dark ferns lie hidden away, scenting
the whole air, and proving itself an irresistible fascination to the
butterflies—busy gossips that they are—flashing purple and velvety black,
gleaming yellow and palest blue.

One of the huge ‘Kuka’ trees is clothed to a height of fifteen or twenty
feet in a gorgeous mantle of _Gloriosa superba_, each vivid green leaf
ending in a long tendril which clings desperately to all it meets. The
blossoms, when first opened, are of a delicate pale golden colour, daily
developing crimson splashes at the base of each petal, and later becoming
entirely an exquisite deep apricot shade—a perfect feast of daintily
varying hues.

Added to these treasures, my ‘Kingdom’ is the happy home of troops of gay
restless monkeys, seldom visible, but everlastingly on the move behind
the green curtain, swinging, leaping and chattering, ever disturbing
flights of tiny green parrots and demure little grey doves.

Skirting the crumbling wall, one follows a narrow footpath towards a
rocky eminence a quarter of a mile away, and, dismounting, explores it on
foot. It is a tiny hill of great steepness, composed for the most part
of piles of massive boulders, from which nearly all the soil has been
washed away by the rain of many seasons. An almost invisible track guides
one up the precipitous side to the summit, an area of, possibly, fifty
feet square, occupied entirely by great rocks, shady niches and coarse
creepers.

The place has a history and a reputation of its own; it is called the
‘Look-out Hill,’ and was greatly used—so runs the tradition—in the times
of Fulani slave-raiding expeditions from Bida. Once arrived at the top,
the full significance of the name is grasped. Far and wide, in all
directions, one can view the surrounding country, and command every road
leading to Kabba, without being visible from below. How vividly one
can picture the anxious watcher, crouching motionless among the rocks,
scanning with straining eyes the paths winding like white ribbons among
the peaceful yam-fields and waving grass, on the alert to detect the
first signs of the advancing Fulah army, and then flying breathless along
the scented forest ways, back to the town, his poor heart thumping on
his ribs, to carry the dread news that sounded the knell of slavery for
himself, his wives and children.

The Kabba folk are of the Bunu tribe; whence their origin I cannot
venture to say. At all events, they speak a remarkably unpronounceable
language of their own, to the utter confounding of any unfortunate
interpreter who does not happen to have been born within fifty miles of
the place. Bunu language is not precisely musical, but I have observed
with mild astonishment that these natives rather like talking it! My
friend, the Balogun, likes to chat easily with his retinue in this
tongue, which appears to have no vowels except odd sounds evolved from
somewhere in the region of the collar-bones, and which seems to demand
some special development about the nose and chest, just as Yoruba and
Kru require peculiarly shaped mouths for their correct enunciation. I
think the Balogun likes to feel that he is making an impression on ‘the
Judge’ in a small way, by this exhibition of jaw-breaking phraseology.
He, by the way, is a man of property, and, as befits the ‘second chief’,
is a leader of society in Kabba, dressing recklessly in a gorgeous black
and white velvet robe. He knows, too, what is due to a lady, even an
English one. Once, when I showed him some elaborate embroidery on which
I was working, he rose manfully to the occasion, and, making use of
his one piece of colloquial English, rather startled me by ejaculating
pleasantly: ‘My God!’

Fetish has a firm hold in Kabba, but to which ‘school’ the people belong,
I have never been able, nor indeed have I tried, to find out, as I
have some belief in treating any man’s religion with as much reverence
and reticence as he does himself. Before describing what I do know of
Bunu ceremonies, I would like to repeat here Mary Kingsley’s admirable
definition of ‘Fetish’: ‘the religion of the natives of the western coast
of Africa, where they have not been influenced either by Christianity
or Mahomedanism’: a fairer and truer view than that usually taken, as
‘rank heathenism.’ However, the whole subject of Fetish is so well and
exhaustively treated both by Miss Kingsley and Major Mockler-Ferryman
in their respective works on West Africa, that it would be as futile as
unbecoming for me to attempt to stumble and halt over the ground they
covered so royally and so completely; therefore I will content myself
with describing the Bunu funeral ceremonies as carried out in Kabba, as
these happened to come under my notice and seemed to me rather unique
and interesting.

In the first place, the corpse is wrapped in the family burying-cloth,
which is an intrinsic feature of every Bunu household. It is a large
cloth quilt, sewn and embroidered with yarns of every imaginable hue—the
wealthier the family, the more elaborate and gorgeous the burying sheet,
the value frequently running up to several pounds. As soon as one is
devoted to its special purpose, the bereaved relations immediately set to
work to provide another according to their means, against a future death.
Nature appears to be very much the same all the world over, and feeling
in Kabba, on the subject of a proper burying-sheet, runs just as high as
it does in the Mile End Road over the momentous question of coaches and
plumes!

When thus suitably arrayed, the corpse is kept in the house for three
days, while four maidens of tender years are selected, and, being placed
in strictest seclusion in a house set apart, are not permitted to speak
a single word during these days. As soon as the lying-in-state is
accomplished, a great number of people from the neighbouring villages
arrive, in obedience to the Sariki’s summons; not necessarily out
of friendship for the dead man, but merely as a matter of religious
ceremonial. Each guest brings a certain proportion of gifts in cloth,
food-stuffs and cowries—especially the last-named. The whole party
having assembled, they start forth for the Ju-ju Hill, the corpse borne
in the midst, drums beating, horns hooting, women uttering mournful
cries, and general excitement prevailing. The grave has been previously
dug in a chosen spot on the hill-side (which is practically one large and
over-crowded cemetery), and is of a curious shape. After the ordinary
grave has been prepared to a depth of four feet or thereabouts, a tunnel
is dug at one end of it, and continued into the earth for a distance of
about twelve feet, the passage being wide enough to admit a man, creeping
on hands and knees.

The party at the foot of the hill seat themselves in a wide circle, and
the four silent girls, coming forward, and raising the body, bear it
away up the hill. It is lowered by them into the grave, and carefully
pushed up the tunnel, the idea being that no earth shall fall on it.
Then, in solemn silence, they return and collect the various offerings
of food, cloth, and cowries from the assemblage, and deposit them beside
and around the corpse; finally, the outer grave is filled in. I have
been told that several pounds’ worth of cowries are thus buried at each
funeral. Meantime, the folks below are holding high revel, dancing,
singing, capering, banging tom-toms, and shouting a most enthusiastic
send-off to their departed fellow-countryman, while he sleeps, all
unconscious of the fun he is missing, lying just where he would choose to
lie, on the slopes of his beloved Ju-ju Hill. Is it very different from
an Irish wake? And is it really much more ‘heathenish?’

[Illustration: THE EMIR’S BAND, BIDA. (p. 124)]

[Illustration: MY ‘PALM’ CAT. (p. 137)

(_Nandinia binotata._)]

Local funerals remind me of another Kabba story, which, though startling,
I know to be absolutely true. It is as follows—An English Police Officer,
while conducting an inquiry there, had a number of witnesses brought
before him (natives), amongst them a woman, with, as usual, a child
strapped to her back. While the inquiry was proceeding, the Police
Officer became conscious of a horrible smell, and, when he could endure
it no longer, inquired the cause among his interpreters and the people
collected around him. All sniffed incredulously, and declared that, to
their consciousness, there was no smell whatever. They could detect
nothing, and evidently put it down, in their own minds, as one more of
the imbecile fads that Englishmen are prone to! The day was warm, the
court-house crowded, the flies seemed more numerous and more maddening in
their buzzing than usual, and, the terrible odour becoming intolerable,
the Police Officer, feeling slightly sick, called for brandy and soda,
and, springing up, declared his intention of discovering the cause.
One turn round the court-house decided him that the horror was in the
neighbourhood of the female witness. He peered closer, and saw at once
that the baby on her back was _dead_! He announced his discovery in
horrified amazement, and was informed quite tranquilly, and as a matter
of course, that the child had been dead for ‘many days,’ but that,
as the mother had come from a distant village to give evidence, she
must, of course, wait till her return before she could give the body
burial! There are many minor ceremonies and festivals, connected with
matters agricultural, the ultimate success of the crops, the coming of
the new yams, etc., but there is little variety in the proceedings, the
main point being, apparently, the making of a ‘cheerful noise’ and the
sacrifice of nothing more dreadful than a few fowls!

Some distance to the south of Kabba there exists a tiny town of the name
of Semolika, curiously situated on the summit of a steep hill, below
which runs the winding bush path—the traveller’s highway. The Semolikas
are not nice characters; most of their time is spent in squatting on the
rocks, watching the road below, till they can spy a string of traders, or
a small caravan, when they swoop down like hawks, robbing and murdering
these unfortunate passers-by! At other times they amuse themselves and
‘keep their hands in’ by attacking their neighbours, who hold them in the
lowest estimation, describing them as having ‘hearts of stone,’ which
means, roughly, that they are insensible to sentiments of friendship,
honour, family ties and common humanity. No Semolika youth can claim to
be considered a man, until he is the proud possessor of a drinking-cup,
consisting of a human skull, taken with his own hand from some poor
wretch he himself has murdered!

These amiable people cherished undying resentment against the ‘white man’
in general; they claimed—rightly or wrongly—to have been unfairly treated
by him, and, having sworn to kill the very next Englishman who entered
their stronghold, they fiercely attacked a small military patrol, under a
young officer, who, on hearing continuous complaints of the Semolikas and
their behaviour from the neighbours all round, decided, with pardonable
imprudence, to march through the place as an object lesson of superior
force. The Semolikas did enough damage to the party to necessitate
reprisals, and in October of that year an expedition left Lokoja to
avenge the insult, accompanied by my husband. The force was entirely
successful in breaking up the culprits’ fastness, and as the operations
were specially interesting owing to the peculiar situation of the place,
I will quote from the Resident’s official report of the attack.

‘... On Sunday, the 16th, we marched into Igarra, which is curiously
situated, being on the opposite side of a narrow valley to Semolika;
the inhabitants of both places are therefore always in view of each
other from the summits of their respective hilltops, and sit by the hour
watching each others’ movements—the distance being about three thousand
yards. The people of these two places have never been friends, the
Semolikas, owing to their hill being the more difficult of the two to
climb, frequently raiding the Igarra farms, and, in addition to the farm
produce, as often as not carrying away women and children. As they are
known to practise human sacrifices, the Igarras are kept in constant
dread of these raids, and, on markets being held at places in the
neighbourhood, large parties arrange to pass along the road together, and
are always armed.

‘On climbing to the summit of the Igarra hill, 1,750 feet, it could be
seen what a very awkward place Semolika hill must be to ascend. The
local formation of boulder-like smooth-topped rocks appears to have been
rather concentrated in this particular mountain, and they rose, one
after another, in constant succession, at gradients varying from almost
the perpendicular, the thin silvery strip of colouring over the surface
of these slabs showing the direction of the ascending path. The Igarras
helped us tremendously, but still, when it came to asking for information
about other ways of getting up to Semolika, the ignorance was too general
to be credited, and I think that even then they were not too sure that
the “white man” would win, and were he _not_ to they might expect a
bad time for long years to come from their old enemy! So, although
much reconnoitring was undertaken, no better path could be seen. On
reconnoitring parties approaching within earshot of the many observing
points the Semolikas were continuously guarding, they would be received
with shouts of defiance and derision, the question being always asked:
“Why don’t you come and try?” etc.... The Semolikas were kept busy now,
and could be seen improving sangars, or endeavouring to make difficult
places still worse.

‘Finally, it was decided to advance on the morning of Tuesday, the 18th,
and on the night before, at 8.30 p.m., the gun detachment carried out
their gun, in order to commence the ascent of the Igarra hill, from
where it had been decided to cover the advance. Although this hill is
not so difficult as Semolika itself, still, no ordinary leather sole and
heel could ever hope to reach its summit, and it was with wonder and
admiration that I watched the manner in which the Igarra people turned
out in their hundreds on this cold and drizzling night, to help to get
the gun to its destination. At places they, accustomed as their toes have
apparently become to cling to smooth surfaces, suffered severely, and at
two points in particular one could only describe their manner of handling
by comparing the gun to a heavy beetle being carried off by a vast
company of ants! It was at one of these places that Captain Phillips, who
was commanding the detachment, had, with admirable foresight, arranged
for drag-ropes, hold-fasts and corresponding paraphernalia, but our
eager allies would brook no delay, and, literally falling on the gun and
its mounting, ran the heavy loads up the sides of this precipice by sheer
force of keen desire. After three hours’ hard climb, at each resting
interval of which the streamingly hot volunteers were most affectionately
patted on the shoulders by gunners and permanent gun carriers alike,
with many “Sanu’s!” to denote their admiration of the herculean task,
the selected ledge of rock was safely reached, and the gun duly mounted.
Heavy rain set in about 2 a.m. and without bedding or shelter of any
kind, the conditions were not pleasant.

‘The main body was supposed to leave camp at 3.30 a.m. which would
enable them to arrive at the foot of the Semolika hill at dawn. One
of the worst places where it was thought opposition might prove most
effective against our side was about one-third of the way up, and was
marked by three palm trees. Some strong sangars had been built, and the
natural features of the place certainly presented the most fearsome
difficulties. It was hoped, therefore, that the gun would succeed in
clearing this trap, and facilitate the advance for the attackers; from
about 4.30 a.m., therefore, every effort was made either to distinguish
our own men commencing their climb, or the enemy concealed in the heavy
undergrowth which was interspersed among the rocks. Unfortunately, there
was a thick mist after the night’s wet weather, and this handicapped the
gunners to a very great extent. At 6 a.m. the first Dane gun boomed out,
reverberating among the rocks and hill-side, and almost immediately after
a break occurred in the veil of mist, showing some hundreds of the enemy,
scampering, veritably like monkeys, from ledge to ledge, from boulder to
boulder, making their way to their various points of vantage, in order
to assist in the defence of their virgin stronghold. A very well-judged
shrapnel was fired at this moment, and, I think, must have checked the
enthusiasm of some at least of the defenders, who could be seen hurriedly
scuttling back. Could this have been repeated, the attackers would have
been much less opposed, except, of course, by the natural existing
difficulties which beset the path, the chief of which, was, I believe,
regarded by the Semolikas as their _pièce de résistance_, which was most
thoroughly emphasized personally, in my case, as it was while clinging to
an eight foot ledge, struggling in vain to get a foothold, that a Dane
gun was fired from most uncomfortable proximity! A long pointed boulder,
impossible to climb, terminated at the so-called path, which, at this
place, consisted of a narrow ledge close to, and under the point of, the
boulder. The defenders had ingeniously built up from this ledge, and
thus most effectually shut an apparently natural entrance gate to the
hill-side. At short distances away were stone sangars in well-selected
positions and, had they been occupied by a more modernly armed enemy, I
fear our casualties would have been very heavy. The drop to the right
from the ledge was considerable, but a small, loaf-shaped foothold
happened to be protruding some feet down, and this was the only means
of proceeding onward. A hurried one-legged balance had to be made upon
its surface when the ledge beyond had to be smartly clutched. On parting
with the perch, it was occupied by a native, who, by pushing upwards,
succeeded in precipitating the climber, on his face, on to the higher
level, once again in comparative safety, and thus every one had to take
his turn!

‘The higher level was a vast sheet of smooth rock, 100 to 150 yards in
length, sloping at a very steep gradient, and offering another deadly
opportunity to the modern firearm. But the Semolikas, at this place, were
content with stones only, and were not, apparently, good shots with these
missiles, for though many were more or less hurt, only one man was struck
in the face. After this, the defenders retired, firing continuously,
until the king’s quarter was reached, where a further determined stand
was made—and where Lieutenant Galloway received a wound. This was their
last combined effort, and for the remainder of the day only desultory
firing took place by people hidden here and there in caves and behind
rocks. A zareba was formed in the best place available ... an attack
being expected during the night, but nothing happened, the rain possibly
damping the enemy’s ardour, as well as his ammunition! For the next few
days every endeavour was made to discover the whereabouts of the fugitive
Semolikas, but without success, although acting on supposed reliable
news which was frequently brought in, the hills for miles around were
diligently searched by our troops....’

Meantime, knowing what I knew of the Semolikas and their rocky fortress,
I spent an anxious and miserable time in Lokoja, waiting for news of the
result; I also said good-bye, with much regret, to Mr. and Mrs. Wilmot,
of the Bank of Nigeria, who left for England. For two whole years Mrs.
Wilmot had remained in Lokoja, with only a few days’ change, occupying
the smallest and most uncomfortable quarters, making acquaintance with
most forms of discomfort, but ever cheery, energetic and plucky, an
object lesson to us all, and though I knew I should miss my friends
greatly, one could not help rejoicing to see their well-earned holiday
come at last.

My husband hurried back to Lokoja a day ahead of ‘the Army’ and delighted
me with a few curios he had secured for me at Semolika. One special
treasure is worth describing in detail; it was, I believe, the Chief’s
own stool, and consists of a solid block of mahogany, black and polished
from long use. The base is solid, and the seat upheld by roughly carved
kneeling figures, while the centre portion is a pillar, having four doors
which actually open and shut, turning in clever little sockets, and
revealing recesses inside, the whole thing being, as I have said, one
solid block of wood, without a join or addition anywhere. The cutting
of those little doors is a great delight to me, and I have never seen
among the many stools I have collected, another at all like it; indeed,
the servants were so impressed with the odd arrangement that nothing
would induce them to open the doors, suspecting Ju-ju, and they greatly
disapproved of my doing so!

For the next few weeks life drifted quietly along, the monotony relieved
by a passing visit from General Kemball, and very sadly, later on, by
the death of ‘Binkie,’ our dearly-loved little fox-terrier. His devotion
and faithfulness to the last was very touching; when he was too ill to
walk, he would painfully and slowly drag himself down the steps, across
the gravel, and lie, exhausted, at the gate, his head between his paws,
watching the Resident’s office with wistful eyes for the return of his
beloved master. Over and over again I carried him back to his basket,
only to see him persistently make his way out again.

I remember finding in the _Spectator_ some lines headed, ‘Modie, a
fox-terrier,’ and with the name altered to ‘Binkie,’ I have kept them
tucked away in my mind ever since. I will make no further apology for
quoting them here, beyond the hope that the author, ‘G.W.F.G.’, will
accept as a tribute the comfort they gave to a heavy heart; any dog-lover
who has not seen them before will love them as I do, and the unfortunate
person who is not a dog-lover will simply—skip them!

    Not strange, perhaps, that, on her beat,
      Nature should hush, by one wide law,
    The patter of four fitful feet,
      The scrape of a persistent paw.

    And yet the house is changed and still,
      Waiting to echo as before
    Hot bursts of purpose hard to chill,
      And indignation at the door.

    No friendly task he left unplied,
      To speed the hour or while the days,
    The grief that mourned him when he died
      Spelt out his little meed of praise.

    They say he only thought in dreams.
      What matter! Lay the silken head
    Throbbing with half a world of schemes
      Under the silent flowers instead.

    The Spring winds in the lilacs play,
      Beside the old wall where he lies:
    The ivies murmur night and day
      Their tiny lisping lullabies.

    Then ask not if he wakes again:
      He meddled not in things too deep;
    And Nature, after joy or pain
      Gives nothing half so kind as sleep.

In the beginning of December we spent a fortnight on a short tour, in the
course of which we discovered Patti Abaja, a quaint little spot just
North of Lokoja, and not more than fifteen miles from cantonments. The
path winds among rather thick bush to the foot of an abruptly-rising
lofty hill, thickly clothed with trees. Here we dismounted and sent the
ponies round to make the ascent by a longer but easier path, and after a
really stiff climb over rocks and boulders for about an hour, we arrived
at the summit, breathless but triumphant, and were confronted by miles
of an absolutely flat plain, partly cultivated, but covered mainly with
fine short grass. It looked exactly as if some playful giant had shaved
the top clean off the mountain! A further walk along the level brought us
to the little hamlet of Patti Abaja, and here was still further room for
wonderment, for, close beside it, the same playful giant had evidently
been to work again, and had scooped out a dozen or so huge handfuls of
the centre of the hill, then tired of his joke, and wandered off to seek
new occupation elsewhere! There was a completely circular basin almost
under our feet, the sides precipitous and rocky, covered with thick
greenery; down below a carpet of farms flourished, and a few figures
moving about looked like ants from our lofty perch. At a point just below
the village a stream, issuing from the rock itself, tumbled and foamed
away down into the valley, and meandered off among ferns, water plants
and grasses, supplying delicious cold water to the community above. The
air was perfectly glorious in its invigorating freshness, with the most
delightful ‘nip’ at sunset and dawn. While there we had a pair of very
fascinating little animals brought to us; they were, I think, what are
called ‘palm-cats’ (_Nandinia binotata_); at that time they were very
tiny, and, when full grown, only slightly larger than a ferret, extremely
pretty, with soft dark grey fur, marked with black spots and rings. They
were very young and helpless, and required a good deal of hand-feeding
before they got lively and independent, but they travelled round with us
in a covered basket quite safely, and, once settled in Lokoja, they were
quite at home, perfectly tame and delightfully playful. One, alas! was
killed by accident, but the other grew and flourished for some months,
till one sad day, when he caught and ate a large locust, and from that
time he refused food, drooped and died. I was sorely disappointed and
grieved at the loss of my tiny pet, who, at a call, would come flying
out from any corner, scamper up to me, run up my skirt, and sit on my
shoulder, with his little wise eyes twinkling, and tiny paws upheld.

We made a shooting camp at Patti Abaja, and spent Christmas there, in
company with Captain Phillips, of the Gunners, whose tastes were similar
to ours, and though the sport, as far as big game was concerned, was a
failure, we were all happy pottering about after guinea-fowl, etc., and
thoroughly enjoyed the difference in the temperature. It was practically
impossible to get near big game, although there was plenty about, for
the ground was as hard as iron, and the steps of a booted foot, or of a
pony, rang as though on a pavement, and must have been audible to the
animals at a great distance. We wound our way down the hill a few days
later, feeling that, even if our spoils had not been many, our Christmas
camp had, at all events, been a pleasant ending to a pleasant year.

About the middle of January we fared forth again, with the object of,
at last, accomplishing the delimitation of the Kabba-Ilorin boundary,
interrupted two years before, and went up the river to Egga, where we
were to meet the Resident of Ilorin, Dr. Dwyer, and from where the
boundary line would start. I had some misgivings, for travelling and
camping in company is not always conducive to peace and harmony; but
directly we all started off my anxieties were laid to rest, and we spent
a delightful three weeks together. If the roads were of the worst, the
camps were of the best, all the arrangements worked smoothly, and we
thoroughly enjoyed ourselves sitting cosily round huge wood fires in
the chilly evenings, chatting and exchanging reminiscences. I made some
new acquaintances in the flower world: the Mexican poppy (_Argemone
mexicana_) made me wonder how it got there; Strophanthus was in full
bloom—queer uncanny blossoms, each pinkish cream petal lengthening out
into a streamer four or five inches long, resembling a flower less than
some curious butterfly or sea anemone. The natives are terrified of it;
beside its poisonous qualities, they believe that the juice produces
instant blindness, and I could not persuade any one to break off a spray
for me to sketch, and was obliged to do it myself, amidst much alarm and
disapproval! In the forest was bright red Bryophyllum and another small
shrub, loaded with glowing flame-coloured flowers; Dr. Dwyer discovered a
specimen of Isochelis for me, and my last ‘find’ was _Kigelia Africana_,
a large tree with truly splendid blossoms of deep crimson, hanging on
pendant stems like glowing lamps set in the brilliant green foliage.

The middle of February found us back in Lokoja, with plenty of work
in the office to be ‘wound up’ before we went on leave, which kept my
husband busy until the High Commissioner arrived in March, desiring
to inspect Kabba with a view to its becoming the headquarters of the
Province. A flying visit was paid there while I packed up, the Sahib
hurrying back to catch the next mail-boat, and as—to use an Indian
expression—we had ‘laid a dak’ at various points on the road, he managed
to cover the fifty odd miles in eight hours! My bull-terrier had just
then burst a blood-vessel, and had to be destroyed, to my grief, and
on March 23 we set our faces down river and towards home, with no
more impedimenta than a parrot, a first-rate talker, who, by the way,
distinguished himself, after a few days in the neighbourhood of the
galley, by exclaiming, while I was displaying him to a friend, ‘Who the
hell are you?’ After that I was allowed to keep him in my own charge!

We had a very pleasant trip, and found a special interest in the persons
of two Arab merchants, who, trading between Tripoli and Kano, had had the
suggestion made to them at the latter place, that, instead of the long
and perilous Desert journey back, occupying seven months at least, it
would be far cheaper and more convenient for them to convey themselves
and their merchandise (ostrich feathers) to the Coast, and return to
Tripoli by sea—a most excellent plan, and one that should, and would,
be universally adopted, but for deep-rooted conservatism and distrust
of new ways. As these two men consented to make the experiment, every
assistance was given them by Government to reach Lagos, and Sir Alfred
Jones gave them and their loads free transport to Liverpool—for they
were, on this occasion, to come to London, instead of transhipping at the
Canaries, so as to test the London market for their feathers. They were
most highly intelligent men; one, ‘Nassuf,’ was the son of an extremely
wealthy Tripoli merchant, the other was a travelling acquaintance, who,
having been robbed of all his possessions in the Desert, was, with
characteristic kindliness, being taken charge of and seen safely home by
Nassuf. They were in quite prosperous circumstances, and had plenty of
money, but found themselves sorely handicapped, once they left Africa,
by speaking nothing but Arabic and Hausa. Therefore, our assistance as
interpreters was requisitioned, and we visited them daily on board,
enjoying many long talks about Tripoli, Kano and the Desert, so that
they came to look on us as their natural protectors and friends, and, on
learning that we, of course, intended leaving the ship at Plymouth, their
dismay and alarm was so deep and sincere, that we decided to go round to
Liverpool with them, and, at least, see them safely ashore with their
valuable merchandise, valued by Nassuf at £60,000!

On arrival, we were met by Sir Alfred Jones, who, with his usual
enterprise, took a keen interest in the experiment, and, at his earnest
request, we consented to take charge of Nassuf and his companion while
they were in England, and bore them off to the _North-Western Hotel_.
There they naturally attracted a good deal of attention in their
picturesque flowing white robes, but their manner of receiving it was
perfection in its well-bred unconsciousness; indeed, their simple, quiet
dignity was in marked contrast to the behaviour of the gaping crowd which
followed us everywhere, and also, alas! to that of well-dressed strangers
who thought them fair game for rude impertinence. Given a pot of coffee
and a box of cigarettes, our ‘lambs,’ as we called them, were perfectly
happy, and would sit for hours in the big hall, utterly unmoved by the
novelty of the scene of continuous bustle of arrival and departure, but
watching it all with their bright intelligent eyes, and asking numberless
shrewd questions in low-toned rapid Hausa.

We then conveyed our charges to Euston, and, on the road, Nassuf confided
to us that he much disliked being mobbed and stared at, therefore he
wished, immediately on arrival in London, to exchange his Arab dress for
orthodox English garments, and, much as we regretted the change, we could
only sympathize with the feeling that prompted him, and promised to ‘make
an Englishman’ of him without delay. At Euston we packed our ‘lambs’ into
a cab, and before getting into another ourselves, explained the situation
to the cabman, requesting him to drive to the first general outfitter
he could find in the Tottenham Court Road. Just as we were starting, he
pulled up, climbed off his box, and, putting a perturbed and puzzled
face through the window, inquired in an anxious and somewhat embarrassed
whisper: ‘Beg parding, sir, but might they be _males or females_?’
With heroic efforts to preserve our gravity, we gave the necessary
information, and were unfeignedly thankful at having escaped being driven
up to a ‘ladies’ shop,’ and the consequent explanations!

Arrived at the outfitter’s, Nassuf, treading noiselessly, and smilingly
serene, walked up to the counter, and asked us to convey to the salesman
his desire to be dressed from head to foot—‘just like him,’ indicating
my husband—‘one of everything—_good_ things,’ he added, ‘I have plenty
of money!’ and, to the bewilderment of the onlookers, he untied endless
knots in a mysterious hidden, white sash, and poured forty sovereigns
out on the counter! A kindly assistant took charge of him, and we waited
patiently, much amused at the fragments of Arabic and English, struggles
with refractory and novel garments, and suppressed chuckles that
proceeded from the little dressing-room, until Nassuf emerged radiant and
complete from his shiny boots to the gloves he so proudly carried, all
his picturesque grace vanished, alas! but quite secure from unwelcome
attention, and, to his amazement, his outfit cost him rather less than
£6! I greatly suspect that the wily young merchant retailed that costume
to great advantage when he reached Tripoli; meantime he adopted quite an
air of indulgent amusement over the appearance of his friend, who, either
from conservatism or from a chivalrous desire to spare his benefactor’s
purse, firmly declined to alter his costume!

We spent several mornings in a great feather warehouse in the City, with
a view to finding a market for Nassuf’s wares, but his hopes were rather
dashed at the sight of masses of splendid plumes from South Africa, and
the price offered for his feathers was, he declared, not half what he
could obtain in Tripoli. Even allowing for Eastern methods of striking
a bargain, he was obviously telling the truth, for, had it been at all
to his advantage, nothing would have been easier than for him to have
disposed of all his feathers then and there. I am inclined to think the
reason is that the Tripoli market, not being supplied with the really
beautiful South African feathers, possibly values more highly the
inferior sort from Nigeria—and they _are_ very inferior, possibly because
the birds are not farmed, and are plucked at any season of the year, and
in a most thorough and cruel fashion. Poor Nassuf was mournfully puzzled
to see his enormous ox-hides, in which the feathers were packed, valued
at five shillings each! In Tripoli, he explained, they are eagerly bought
for a high price, being in great request for Arab tents!

So, after every kindness and courtesy had been showered on the young
merchant—and nothing could have exceeded his grateful acknowledgment of
it—the decision was arrived at to repack his feathers, and speed him on
his journey to Tripoli, and, after a visit to the Colonial Office (when
we persuaded him to resume his national dress), we conveyed our charges
down to the Docks, much encumbered with packages of apples, razors,
cheese and a gold-topped umbrella, and saw them safely established on
the _Gulf of Suez_, _en route_ for Malta and Tripoli. It was quite a sad
parting, the two men were child-like in their grief and affection, and we
could only console them by promising, whenever the opportunity occurred,
to visit Tripoli as the guests of Nassuf’s father, and, meantime, to bear
them in mind, and send them news of ourselves.

A couple of hours later we were watching a play, our leave had really
begun, and the _Gulf of Suez_, preparing to slip down the Thames,
carrying off our ‘lambs,’ seemed already part of a passed fantastic
dream.




CHAPTER IX

Borgu


Outside the Bar at Forcados an October tornado was in full swing, huge
green seas swept past, the wind howled and the rain fell in torrents,
almost hiding from view the little black ‘branch boat’ tossing uneasily
half a mile away. We stood on the streaming deck, watching our belongings
being transferred, with the greatest difficulty, from the mail-boat to
the other, each boat-load apparently faring worse than the last as the
hurricane increased in violence, and it seemed an absolutely foolhardy
risk for us, and four other passengers for Nigeria, to attempt to
reach the _Dodo_ in an open boat. It was an _impasse_, for the tides
did not suit, and, with every desire to assist us, our Captain was not
justified in incurring the danger of trying to cross the Bar: waiting
was out of the question, even for twenty-four hours, as these tornadoes
sometimes last for days together, therefore we had to make the best of an
unpleasant situation and ‘face the music’! So the _Dodo_ steamed round
us and anchored on our lee side—at what seemed a _very_ long distance—so
as to give us, at least for the start, a certain amount of protection,
and enabling the ladder to be let down, a great consideration, which
avoids the dangerous process of being deposited in a heaving, rocking
boat by means of a ‘mammy chair’ or a bucket.

Our baggage safely (more or less!) transferred, kind friends lent us
oilskins, and we six unfortunate wayfarers cautiously crept down the
ladder, established ourselves in the boat, waved farewells to the line
of anxious faces at the rail above, and set forth, benefiting for a few
minutes by the shelter afforded by the ship, but only too soon finding
ourselves very much at the mercy of wind and waves.

Most fortunately, however, it is provided that, in the face of _real_ and
present danger, the smallest-spirited of us has no sense of fear, but
rather one of exhilaration—it is no new discovery of mine, I know, but
it is an immense comfort at the moment, and, though the chances of our
being swamped at any moment were enormous, I had the satisfaction, while
I hugged ‘Diana’ (our latest acquisition, a beautiful setter-spaniel), of
deciding that if this _was_ the end of the chapter, it was nice to finish
in such good company! I think I had just arrived at this philosophic
reflection when our boat was whirled and sucked in under the stern of
the _Dodo_, where the propeller was revolving, and the heaving sea
threatened to throw us up and crush us like egg-shells. There was just
a moment while we all stared upwards at the black stern and held our
breaths, then the wave passed and a mighty pull brought us round, just
in time, and a few minutes later we were all standing on the _Dodo’s_
dripping deck, congratulating each other on having succeeded in getting
there! It was quite the nastiest experience I have yet had, and I know
that all my companions would agree that I have by no means exaggerated
the seriousness of it. This transhipping from ‘intermediate’ boats is a
most unpleasant, and also dangerous business, ruining baggage and risking
lives; it is not too much to say that no one should be called upon to
take such a risk, and I believe that every official in Northern Nigeria
would rather sacrifice a week’s leave than do so.

We returned our borrowed oilskins by the boat-men’s hands, and groped
our way, in the driving rain, to our luggage, only to find that the
particular box we sought had been forced open and rifled, and our new
three-guinea mackintoshes had vanished! This was getting on towards ‘the
last straw,’ but the kindly skipper, after much hunting, found a large
native cloth, which I could wrap over my soaking muslin blouse, and, when
some tea had been made, and one of us had produced an immense plum-cake,
we began to forget our sorrows, and steamed up to Burutu just as the
darkness was falling, much comforted to see the smiling black face of
‘Momo,’ our faithful head steward, come down to meet us.

The next morning, as the _Empire_ fussed and paddled up the familiar
creeks, and the sunshine was bright again, we opened the boxes that
seemed to have suffered most from sea-water. My own clothes had fared
badly, and it was a little saddening to cast overboard stained sodden
masses (including my best evening frock!) which had been dainty muslins
and chiffons. Destruction to nearly all one’s possessions is all in the
day’s work in Nigeria, but it was rather saddening to see the destructive
process well begun even before arrival!

We had a coop full of English fowls, Buff Orpingtons and Black Minorcas,
and they, poor things, had very narrowly escaped drowning, and had been
so terribly knocked about that they could hardly stand for many days;
indeed, I think we were lucky in losing only two hens as a result of
their experiences.

We arrived in Lokoja on the 14th of October, and found many familiar,
kind faces to welcome us; one dear friend of mine had even delayed
her leave a few weeks so as not to miss us—a really heroic proof of
friendship, and one greatly valued! Almost immediately my husband was
ordered to take charge of Borgu, the Northernmost Province on the right
bank of the Niger, and we were jubilant at the prospect of seeing some
new country, especially as Borgu possessed a great reputation for good
shooting; but our departure was delayed unavoidably for nearly three
months, involving a state of restless uncertainty and suspense, a thing
abhorrent to us both, and which has, oddly enough, been our portion
almost continuously for the last ten years!

There came to Lokoja at this time a quaint and unusual visitor in the
person of ‘Fritz.’ ‘Fritz’ was a young hippopotamus, I can hardly call
him a baby on account of his size (about that of a very large pig),
though he was only a few months old, brought down the Benue by Captain
Stieber, the Resident of German Bornu, on his way to Berlin. He (Fritz,
I mean!) was the oddest thing in pets, for he was perfectly tame, and
could scarcely be called sharp, or even lively, but there was distinct
individuality in his wide, rather satirical smile and tiny twinkling eye
which commanded respect, though he did not lend himself to petting. For
fear of losing this valuable little person he was usually tied up when
taken down to bathe, for which purpose he wore an elegant and original
collar, made of a cask hoop; he seemed perfectly happy and contented,
wandering among the grass at the Preparanda, consuming untold quantities
of tinned milk, and rolling in awkward ecstasies in the warm sand. I
believe Captain Stieber was perfectly successful in landing his pet safe
and well at the Berlin Zoo.

In December we got our ‘marching orders,’ packed up, and—on Christmas
Day!—started on our long river journey to Bussa, our new headquarters.
When our last friend had waved ‘Good-bye’ at Mureji, and the little white
stern-wheeler swept round the bend, and swung out into the great silent,
gleaming river, where the distance was all opalescent Harmattan mist,
the water like glass and the heavy air laden with soft aromatic scents,
floating lazily out from the walls of tropical verdure on either hand, we
felt that the ‘onward and outward’ craving which so deeply possesses us
both was in a fair way to be gratified.

After the hurry and stress of departure from the busy station down river,
and the final disgorging of passengers, mails and cargo at Mureji, it was
infinitely peaceful to lie out on the now deserted deck and absorb and
drink in the matchless beauty of it all, a beauty which seems to seize
and hold one, making the blood race and pulses throb. The marvellous
colouring, the masses of vegetation hanging over motionless reflections,
clear and detailed as their originals, in the olive-hued water; the
solemn fish-eagles, sharply silhouetted against the pale sky, immovably
still and ceaselessly peering into the silent pools below; those
mysterious little creeks creeping inwards where the branches hang low
giving glimpses of flecked sunshine and shade, gloom and gold, bringing
to mind that strange indefinable world that is neither dream-land nor
fairy-land, but which very surely exists, and is sometimes momentarily
revealed to most of us.

[Illustration: ‘FRITZ.’ (p. 151)]

[Illustration: OUR START FROM BUSSA FOR ILLO. (p. 161)]

A tangible part of the universal placidity was our pilot: he would sit
crouching on the deck, hour after hour, wrapped in a white blanket, for
the morning air was very keen, his wise old face tirelessly watching
the water. They steer by sight, of necessity, as the channels shift and
change continually; not a word passed, but the slightest wave or quiver
of his slender brown hand conveyed his meaning to the stolid sailor at
the wheel, and the little boat crossed and re-crossed, dodged and curved
in perfect obedience to the silent watcher, closely noting every ripple
and swirl with his far-seeing dreamy eyes.

At Jebba the scene changed abruptly from low-lying grassy marsh land
and warm sandbanks, where the wild duck and geese were wont to gather,
to great beetling cliffs and walls of rock, which rose sheer from the
still water, seemingly shutting in the river altogether, and giving the
impression of one end of a Highland loch. Jebba struck me as rather a
dreary spot, in spite of its undoubted beauty, having been formerly the
headquarters of the Government and now utterly deserted, save for the
Niger Company’s Store, which gives it an air of some life and briskness.
I climbed the hill by the old zig-zag path, now scarcely discernible,
and wandered round the remnants of ruined bungalows; of some, nothing
remained but the flight of cement steps, standing forlorn where all
else had vanished; others were the crumbling ruins of native-built
mud houses—everywhere was desolation and decay. There is something
essentially saddening about an abandoned station, and the island at
Jebba, with its traces of ‘white’ occupation, added to the impression of
melancholy desertion: the cemetery was there, a lasting and tragic record
of duty doggedly done, in the teeth of all difficulties, quiet heroism,
and true British persistence, under the inspiration of an indomitable
leader—to the end.

However, there was little time for cheerless reflection; our evening
was spent strenuously—the Sahib struggling with fever—in shifting our
belongings from the security of the _Kapelli_ which now had to turn round
and steam down river again, to carry the mails and passengers from Mureji
to Lokoja, to the narrow quarters of a steel canoe; and, in the chilly
grey dawn of the following morning, with endless unnecessary buzzing,
chatter, and running to and fro, the little paddle-wheel began to
revolve, and we were away on the next stage of our journey. The fussing
and churning of our tiny boat seemed utterly impertinent in the face of
the gigantic frowning cliffs, the ‘Ju-ju Rock’ towering grim and bare
save for a thick undergrowth, at the base, of the unsightly euphorbia,
greatly dreaded by the natives, who declare that like strophanthus, it
will cause instant blindness to all who touch it. The sun rose on scenery
resembling a mighty salmon river, the water swirling past smooth grey
rocks, sheer cliffs and overhanging verdure; this stretch of the Niger
immediately above Jebba had almost the appearance of a stone gateway,
for, later, the swift current spread itself out again, wide and placid,
to level green lowlands far away on either bank, until Badjibo was
reached, and we were once more among rocks and rising ground.

Here a halt of two days occurred, perforce, as our small craft could go
no higher, a further transfer of our possessions into native canoes being
necessary, and we had to wait until the ‘Etsu’ of Badjibo could procure
the said canoes from some mysterious direction indicated by a vague
wave of his hand. Meanwhile, we were most comfortably installed in an
excellent rest-house—excellent, that is, to African travellers’ eyes—the
square compound, encircled by a mud wall, containing four native-built
huts, might not appeal very strongly to fastidious tastes, but, to us, it
spelt something like luxury, plenty of room, a dim, cool, clean dwelling,
built solidly and well as the Nupe custom is, and a real relief after
the terribly cramped accommodation and blistering heat of a steel canoe.
Here, too, a new diversion awaited us in the shape of the undesirable
activities of an angry swarm of bees, whose advent made our household
generally move faster than I had ever seen them do—I can imagine nothing
more effective than swarming bees for making slow folks bustle!

Outside our compound were two immense trees, one covered with
creamy-white pendant blossoms, the other bearing bright yellow berries
in almost incredible profusion. It was one of our chief pleasures to
watch these trees, and find delight in the ever-varying throng of
brilliant-hued birds who came, chirped, ate and fought all the morning
long. Great plump green pigeons, with their exquisite plumage, deep
yellow breast and wings shaded mauve, green and grey, others which we
called the ‘black fidgets’ from their incessant twittering and flying,
flashing, as they went, a deep metallic blue; there were smaller birds
too, one almost entirely canary-coloured, another tiny wren-like thing,
all crimson and soft brown, hundreds of tiny atoms of bird-life, hopping
and darting so quickly that a clear view of them was almost impossible,
except in the case of the exquisite little ‘honey-birds’ who, caring
nothing for the luscious berries, frequented the other tree, and
delicately sipped the honey out of the drooping flowers, their backs
gleaming brilliant green, and breasts glowing copper—their whole persons
smaller than a cockroach! They were a busy, merry crew, children of the
sunshine, happily untouched by want or fear.

We fished the next day, without much science or skill on my part, and, to
our immense surprise, our efforts were rewarded by the landing of a most
uncanny-looking fish; indeed, as it whirled out of the water, I believed
for a moment that we had inadvertently hooked the corpse of a green
pigeon! Its length was about ten inches, the head blunt and the body very
round, gaily striped with brilliant yellow and green, the breast a paler
yellow, and protruding like a pouter pigeon. He was quite a stranger to
me, and to this day I have never discovered his name—I trust it may be
one befitting his truly gorgeous appearance! At all events, the immediate
circle of admirers of our prowess unanimously cried ‘A—a!’ (No, no!) and
assured us that our catch was bitter and uneatable; and when an African
native pronounces any living thing uneatable, it must be uneatable
indeed, so we took their word for it, and having sufficiently admired his
somewhat grotesque beauty, we carefully unhooked him and put him back.

Early next morning we left Badjibo, heading a procession of native
canoes, and a most adventurous journey we had! The river hereabouts
is split up into various channels by islands and rocks, and we found
ourselves in true Highland scenery, brown water rushing and creaming in
its fall round and over huge boulders, the river fringed on either side
by an immense growth of trees and bushes hanging above the stream, and
making it a matter of great difficulty for the canoe-men to make any
headway against the strong current, owing to the almost impossibility
of finding ground for their long palm-wood poles. They could only seize
branches and twigs, and so endeavour to haul the canoe up-stream, which
method was, naturally, productive of a rich crop of misadventures, such
as the sudden crashing down of the rotten branch to which the muscular
brown arms were clinging, and the consequent rush down-stream of the
canoe—our heads being banged and swept by branches and creepers, until
it could be brought again under control by the whole party hanging
desperately on to the nearest tree, and the strenuous effort, swirling
and rocking, had to be commenced again, till we could crawl back to the
same point, and beyond, perhaps, into smoother water, till the next rapid
appeared, and the same difficulty—and, incidentally, danger—had to be
encountered once more. I can vouch for it that we had not a ‘dull moment’
from start to finish, and one could hardly be reproached for harbouring
a slight feeling of insecurity, especially as the water continuously
bubbled in through a very inadequate mend in the bottom of the canoe,
just under my eye, and vigorous baling went on ‘amidships’ all the
time! Anything less like the lower reaches of the Niger could hardly be
imagined; in the narrow channels where the trees meet overhead and the
water tumbles, loud-voiced, over rocks and snags, it is hard to recognize
it as the same river, and only in the open reaches do the crimson and
white quisqualis and purple convolvulus remind me that I have met and
loved them some three hundred miles nearer the coast.

At the worst points, where the whole face of the river appeared to
be barred with a rush of falling waters, and no smallest passage was
visible amidst the tumbling foam, the canoes were hauled under the
steep bank, and their entire contents bundled out thereon, we, the
passengers, clambering, by the aid of roots and branches, to a place of
some security, where we sat on the warm sand and watched the manœuvres
down below. The majority of the canoe-men, divesting themselves of their
clothing, took boldly to the stream, where, with the rushing water up
to their shoulders, struggling against the current and slipping on the
stones, they deftly and manfully dragged the absurd little crafts through
the rapids by means of rope hauling, vigorous pushing, swimming, and
attempts at poling. They are practically amphibious, these men, and it
was a fine sight, the active figures swimming and wading, dark, wet skins
gleaming, white teeth flashing, while the air was full of shouts and
cries, not to mention the chorus of advice and directions from the bank,
and pious ejaculations of thanksgiving as each canoe reached a place of
safety. Once arrived in more placid waters, the re-embarkation would take
place, and the journey be resumed.

Our river trip ended at Leaba, a small village above which is the Wuru
rapid, about the worst on the river; the natives have driven great tree
trunks vertically into the rocky bed of the stream, and attached to them
a stout rope by which the unfortunate traveller must drag himself and his
canoe through the seething torrent. There is a saddening loss of life
here, and death by drowning is so frequent that the riverside folks are
perfectly stolid and unmoved by it, as we noticed when a man lost his
life that very afternoon, trying to cross the river at this spot. The
water is also infested with alligators of considerable size; possibly
they come up at high water, and are unable to get back until the next
wet season—one is told that the body of a man upset from a canoe in the
rapids is seldom or never recovered.

At Leaba we found ponies awaiting us, and did the remaining few marches
on horseback, leaving the baggage to make its way slowly up-stream, and
on the 9th of January we reached Bussa, where the Assistant Resident,
Mr. Dwyer, gave us a cordial welcome. Bussa town is a mere hamlet, or,
rather, collection of hamlets, straggling along the river bank; a place
of no importance whatever, where there is not even the mildest attempt
at a market, where trade is nil, and existence about as stagnant as the
mind can picture it.

At that time, however, we had no opportunity of making close acquaintance
with the place, as, about ten days after our arrival, we were obliged
to hurry off to Illo, as work of much urgency awaited my husband there.
Anticipating long marches and great heat, I decided to travel in an
improvised hammock, but the paths were so bad, and the bearers so
unskilful, that, after the first day, I gladly mounted my pony, leaving
Diana in sole possession of the hammock! It was a hot, weary journey,
the dust and glare very unpleasant; each halting-place seemed a dirtier
and more unsavoury hamlet than the last, till we reached the large
walled town of Kaoji, where our spirits, which had rather drooped at the
apparently hopeless poverty and desolation of our new province, revived
a little at the sight of brisk, intelligent Fulanis, replacing the
apathetic, ignorant, dull Borgus.

We had scarcely unpacked at Illo, when, to our intense dismay, Diana,
who, with her sweet disposition and high intelligence had made herself
very, very dear to us both, began to flag and display the usual dread
symptoms, and ten days later we miserably buried her under a great shady
tree. I do not think we have ever cared to go out shooting since.

That very day came the disquieting news of the disaster at Satiru near
Sokoto, involving the deaths of Mr. Hilary, Mr. Scott and Mr. Blackwood,
while endeavouring to effect the arrest of the ringleaders of a small
faction of malcontents, who had been spreading disaffection. Such an
event as anything resembling a native rising naturally called for prompt
action, and troops were hurriedly moved north, the Illo detachment was
ordered away at once, and, as my husband’s work called us to Yelwa, we
also prepared for departure, and, less than six hours after the telegram
had arrived, the busy ‘lines’ and fort stood empty, silent and deserted,
while a procession of canoes was rapidly descending the river.

Illo is not actually on the Niger, and at Giris, the small village where
we embarked, we noticed a quaint local custom which I do not remember to
have seen elsewhere. Some of the round huts had bunches of short, dry
bamboo twigs hanging from the apex of the thatch, rattling cheerfully in
the evening breeze, and, on inquiry, we were told that any young man who
desired to marry hung out this signal, so that all match-making parents
of daughters might take a note of his intentions, and presently parade
their most attractive daughters for his benefit! A vision crossed my mind
of this simple system adopted in more civilized circles, and harassed
mothers anxiously scanning the surrounding chimney-pots from a top window
in Grosvenor Square!

A few days later we were back at Bussa, and a time of considerable
discomfort arrived for all of us. March and April are always the hottest
and most unpleasant months in Nigeria, but Bussa seemed to me to be much
hotter and more unpleasant than any other spot I know. This was partly
due to our wretched houses—badly built, ill-thatched mud dwellings,
which afforded little protection from the heat, the inside temperature
reaching 103° and 104° every afternoon. The nights were oppressively
hot. We used to move our beds all over the compound in order to catch
the least particle of breeze, and were out each morning at five o’clock
to get an hour’s ride in the cool—for by half-past six no one would care
to be out in the sun. Perhaps the worst feature of these months was the
‘dry tornadoes,’ violent dust-storms, when the clouds would roll up with
most hopeful rapidity and inky blackness, and a hurricane of wind would
tear through the house for an hour or so, laden with dust, dirt and sand,
almost instantly covering every thing with a deep layer, at the same time
usually removing a good deal of the flimsy thatch. One could only sit and
endure, protecting eyes, mouth and hair from the flying grit by means of
a motor veil, and longing for rain till the hurricane passed and died
away, leaving us _very_ miserable and uncomfortable—and as dry as before!

However, the 30th of April brought the first rain, and we thankfully
put the ‘hot weather’ behind us for the rest of the year. At the end
of May we started on a visit to Ilesha, a customs station in the south
of the province, to inquire into a serious theft of Government money
which had occurred there. It was infinitely pleasanter marching than our
last journey northward, and the paths were good enough to allow of our
cantering a great part of our long marches. From Bussa we were escorted
to the Meni River, some three miles, by the Sariki and all his myrmidons
on horseback, and, as we had a march of twenty-two miles before us, and
a good road, we drove the whole party in front of us at a sharp canter.
It is curious and amusing to notice how utterly uncongenial to the
native and his horse is a steady canter—they simply cannot do it, their
horsemanship consisting entirely of furious sprinting and a dancing sort
of walk, varied by plunges into the high grass, and rushes back on to the
road. We had the greatest difficulty in keeping our escort going, and, to
our surprise, men and horses were quite blown when we reached the river
bank. Here we said our farewells, crossed the river in canoes—the ponies
swimming—mounted again and rode off.

We had a capital sandy track through shady forest country, the young
green grass seemed absolutely _made_ to be a background for primroses
and bluebells—instead it was thickly sprinkled with delicate mauve
terrestrial orchids, and the deeper purple iris-like flowers of ‘ground
ginger,’ while feathery asparagus fern climbed and trailed everywhere.
We crossed two deep rocky rivers with some difficulty, lunched and
rested awhile on the shady bank of the second, and late in the afternoon
reached our first halt, a town named Wa-wa. One incident of that day’s
march which comes back to me was my dismounting to lead my pony across
an awkward deep cleft in the road; he jumped very wide, dragging the
rein from my hand, broke away and cantered gaily off up the path towards
Wa-wa, leaving me to contemplate ruefully the joys of a five-mile walk
to complete a long march! Nevertheless, recollecting an insatiable
greediness to be one of the culprit’s chief characteristics, I set
off along the path at a leisurely walk, and, as I expected, very soon
discovered him, grazing to his heart’s content, and so pleased with his
surroundings that he submitted most placidly to be captured and mounted.

Wa-wa is a large town of rather unusual appearance, consisting of
groups of tiny hamlets separated by wide green spaces, at this season
of the year covered with delightful short turf. Narrow red gravel paths
connecting these clusters of houses gave quite a cultivated air, and the
spacious green stretches were very pleasant to look at. The trees, too,
were unusually large, and each hamlet rejoiced in spreading ‘shedia’ and
‘durmi’ trees. We had a roomy and comfortable rest-house, which unluckily
admitted a fair share of the torrential rain which fell during the night!

The following day we found the rivers much swollen, and crossing them by
means of fallen trees and rickety native bridges savoured somewhat of
Blondin’s feats. Between Kali and Vera we had quite a special piece of
good fortune; cantering through the cool shady woodland, we both pulled
up suddenly, noticing two large animals moving among the trees and high
grass. We had barely exchanged a whisper when, as they bounded across an
open grassy space, we discovered, to our delight, that we were watching
two large lions! There was no possibility of doubt, the ground was quite
open and the animals were distinctly in view, in brilliant sunshine—and
the tail of a lion is quite unmistakable, with its odd little bunch
of hair at the end! The road itself was crossed and re-crossed with
numberless tracks of deer, so, no doubt, the lions found it a profitable
hunting-ground. We watched the bush intently on the chance of getting
another glimpse of the splendid creatures, but the few stragglers who
had come up did not apparently sympathize with our desire, and displayed
unusual activity about reaching the camp!

As we approached Kaiama, the old Sariki came out with all his people,
and the usual accompaniment of beating drums and blowing horns, and
escorted us to the confines of the town, where we turned off, and, after
following a path in the bush for about a mile, came upon a clearing, some
eight or ten acres in extent, in the centre of which stood, bare and
solitary, a double storeyed brick bungalow—the Residency! Formerly Kaiama
was the provincial headquarters, and the staff inhabited a clay-walled
enclosure in the town, containing a few wretched huts, originally a
French fort. Here, the site was low and unhealthy, and a change was
decided on; the brick bungalow was built, but was never finished or
permanently occupied, as a further decision was arrived at to move the
headquarters altogether to Bussa! It is regrettable that the bungalow
could not have been removed too! It was very comfortable, of course,
to find oneself on a wooden floor, and under a watertight roof, but
the situation was so ill-chosen, so utterly lonely and desolate, that
it was depressing to a degree. Absolutely nothing was in sight but the
monotonous endless bush, not a sound, not a single habitation, not even a
breath of rising smoke, for the town was distant and invisible. Scarcely
a soul ever came or went, for the path to the town was said to be
infested by leopards and hyænas, and was sedulously avoided, even before
sunset.

We visited the grave of Mr. Ward-Simpson, a young police officer who
died there three years ago; it was a very peaceful spot, in the deep
shade of a spreading tree, and we satisfied ourselves that it was
well-cared for, and neatly fenced in.

The Sariki of Kaiama is a highly intelligent old gentleman, though he
bears a distinctly bad character among all his neighbours for high-handed
bullying and dishonesty. We found it very interesting listening to his
stories of past years, which he delighted to tell with a considerable
sense of humour, while he turned the leaves of the _Spectator_ with a
great air of interest and appreciation. He had rather a special connexion
with the late High Commissioner, Sir Frederick Lugard, having, years ago,
when the latter was travelling through Borgu, making treaties, saved his
life by warning him of an ambush prepared for him. He has always been
very loyal to the Government, and it is a pity that he is held in such
detestation by his own people, though, perhaps, only natural that, with
native cunning, he should have used his boasted friendship with the High
Commissioner as an universal threat to all whom he wished to intimidate.
He goes in terror of death by witchcraft or ‘medicine’ (i.e. poison) and
solemnly assured us that quite lately he had had a wonderful escape—a
woman in the town having actually _kept an iguana_, and, of course,
everybody knows that to touch an iguana with any article belonging to
the Sariki would cause the latter’s instant death! This well-known fact
was warmly upheld by many of our own following, so it evidently behoves
one to choose one’s pets carefully in Kaiama! The Sariki had, however,
soothed his shattered nerves by relieving the conspirator of every bit of
‘real estate’ that she possessed!

A few days’ marching through the cool green woods, lavishly decorated
with what the florists call ‘stove plants,’ white and crimson striped
lilies, and the earliest Gloriosas, unfolding their delicate crimson,
gold-edged petals—for, in June, the ‘mauve’ season is over, and the
‘scarlet-and-gold’ time coming, brought us to Bodebere, a pretty little
hamlet where we camped under a huge shady tree, and had the benefit of a
truly magnificent view of miles of wooded country, sloping away to the
south, where some blue peaks were faintly visible. We were much struck
with the quantity of young life around us—beside the human babies, there
were lambs, kids, ducklings and chickens scuttling about under our feet.
The sheep and goats in this country are extremely small, for the most
part, and their babies are the most fascinating, absurd little furry
bundles imaginable, about nine inches high, and needing only a green
painted stand to make them perfect toyshop treasures!

On the road into Ilesha we noticed that almost every third bush was a
custard apple, loaded with fruit. We gathered them as we passed, and
thoroughly enjoyed their delicious creamy golden-hued pulp. The people
call them ‘Gwando-n-daji’ (wild paw-paw), and, judging by the hundreds
of skins and stones scattered on the road, they greatly appreciate them
also. The custard apple is almost the only wild fruit in the country
which is really palatable, except, perhaps, the tamarind, which, though
very refreshing, is terribly acid when eaten raw.

We found Ilesha a wretched ruinous-looking town, dirty and unattractive;
there was no rest-house on the high ground where the police detachment
is quartered, so we descended, rather disgustedly, into the town, quite
fifty feet lower, and, after winding amongst grubby little lanes and
evil-smelling narrow byways, emerged upon an open space beside the
market, where a fair-sized native house was got ready for us.

There was a general air of disturbance, quite contrary to custom no one
had come to welcome us, the markets were deserted, hardly an individual
was to be seen—obviously there was trouble in the air! Presently a string
of most forlorn-looking, decrepit old men limped, crawled and hobbled up,
and, when they had, with immense difficulty, doubled up their rheumatic
limbs into a sitting posture before us, they poured forth their tale of
woe. A misfortune unprecedented, unheard-of, beyond the experience of
even the most aged of them, had occurred in the night—the old Sariki had
died! ‘Full of years’ he must have been—our toothless, palsied visitors
mumbled that he was much older than any of them, and one amongst them was
actually the heir!

[Illustration: REPAIRING THE BUSSA RESIDENCY. (p. 170)]

[Illustration: BALU. (p. 180)

(SERVAL CAT.)]

Their sorrow and dismay was truly pathetic, as they lamented that ‘all
the people were bewildered ... they could do nothing ... they knew not
what to think....’ We offered our condolences and sympathy, and when they
had asked and received permission to carry out the funeral ceremonies
exactly as if we were not there, they departed somewhat cheered and
comforted.

The three next days were rather a trial—the drumming day and night,
the incessant wailing and shrieking of the women, the entire cessation
of business of all kinds, and the consequent difficulty of obtaining
supplies, made me watch the digging of the huge grave with rather a
personal interest. It was done in a manner exactly similar to the Kabba
custom which I have already described in detail. By the evening of the
third day all the people from the surrounding villages had arrived, the
last comer being the special person entrusted with the duty of actually
laying the dead man in his grave, a duty which might be performed only
by one who had never seen the Sariki’s face in life. The funeral was
accompanied by much firing of Dane guns, a terribly noisy performance,
and we felt sincerely thankful to hear before long that the ammunition
had given out. But the drums and horns lasted all night, and were used
with untiring vigour!

The curious custom ordains that the women of the establishment must
‘wail’ in idleness for three months, and, further, that no head of a
household may sleep inside his own house for the same period. Therefore,
immediately the burying was accomplished, a large camp of little grass
huts sprang up all round the grave, outside the ‘royal’ compound. It
seemed to me very touching, the absolutely conscientious way these
simple souls obeyed the ‘custom’ at what must have been the greatest
inconvenience and discomfort to themselves, many of them infirm old men,
bent and crippled with rheumatism, sleeping for many weeks in miserable
little grass shelters, in the torrential rains just then commencing.

Some days were spent in endeavouring to get light upon the robbery
of money from the toll-clerk’s house, but with little or no success.
It was rather defeating, at the outset, to be gravely assured by the
clerk himself, an intelligent, educated native, that ‘the robbery was
undoubtedly effected through the wicked machinations of these evil-minded
Borgus—they having placed ju-ju or medicine in his dwelling, so that
he—and the police guard!—should so soundly sleep that the unprincipled
thieves were enabled to pass over his prostrate body, and remove the
box!’ This perfectly lucid and apparently satisfactory explanation was
borne out by the production of the said ju-ju, consisting of little balls
of grass containing horrible mixtures of various ingredients, which
had been found stuffed into the thatch of his house. Such overwhelming
reasons for successful burglary had, in every one’s opinion, rendered
all inquiry useless, and the thief had had plenty of time to carry his
prize out of Northern Nigeria altogether, which made the investigation
rather a hopeless task. Not a clue of any kind could be obtained, and
all examination produced nothing but the wearying reiteration of the
bewitchment story.

On our way back to Bussa we spent two days at Kaiama, and while there a
terrific tornado came up one afternoon, and we were very thankful for
the solid protection of the bungalow there. We stood on the verandah,
watching the magnificent lightning, as the storm passed away over the
town, and, simultaneously with a blinding flash, came a report like a
Howitzer, which made us both wonder if anything had been ‘struck.’ Early
the next morning arrived the Sariki himself, and with an air of mystery
and some trouble, informed us that ‘a stone from God’ had fallen during
the storm, burning and wrecking a hut—happily unoccupied at the time—and
had buried itself at some depths in the ground. His people were scared
and worried, and were already ‘making ju-ju’ and preparing offerings
of blood and oil on the spot where the ‘demon’ lay buried. They seemed,
in a dim sort of way, to connect the event with our visit, and when we
suggested digging up the stone, they obeyed with the greatest alacrity,
and the ‘devil’ was accordingly exhumed and handed to us, while we, in
return, made a present of money to remove unpleasant impressions by means
of a little feast.

The find _appeared_ to be an aerolite of most singular appearance, and I
cannot describe it better than by quoting a letter written by my husband
to the _Spectator_ on the subject:—

‘It is shaped like an axe-head, or like a slightly flattened egg, with
the broad end sawn off and filed to an edge. It is four inches in length,
and two and a quarter inches wide at its widest end, gradually narrowing
to a blunt point. At its greatest depth, about three and a quarter inches
from its point, it measures an inch and a half; from this point its
curves to both ends are beautiful. It has a smooth mottled surface, is
non-magnetic, and weighs a little over half a pound.’[1]

    [1] This ‘aerolite’ has subsequently been examined by the Royal
    Meteorological Society, and pronounced to be ‘a very good
    specimen of a Celt.’

We bore this treasure off in high delight at acquiring so unusual a
curiosity, and found ourselves back at Bussa by the end of the month. By
that time the rains were in full swing, and the surrounding country had
become a marsh, rendering walking impossible, and riding dangerous and
unpleasant. It was, however, a good opportunity for closer study of the
primitive Bussa folks, and their town—the scene of Mungo Park’s tragic
death. I spent much time endeavouring to elicit details on this latter
subject, which might have more resemblance to the probabilities, and even
the truth, than the published and accepted accounts. I am now convinced
of what I had always suspected, that Mungo Park’s death was a purely
accidental one, due entirely to ignorance of the dangers of the river in
the neighbourhood of Bussa. The statement that ‘armed natives, seeing
the predicament the strangers were in, hurled their weapons in showers
on them,’ is, to any one who knows the geography of the place, bordering
on the ridiculous, and is strenuously denied by the natives of Bussa,
who declare that the correct version of the tragedy is that said to have
been given to Major Denham in Kuka by the son of a Fulah chief, who had
come from Timbuctoo. This man ‘denied that the natives who pursued the
boat in canoes had any evil intention; their object was mere curiosity
to see the white men, and the canoes that followed Park from Timbuctoo
contained messengers from the King, who desired to warn the strangers of
the dangers of navigating the river lower down!’ More than this, the
Bussa people tell how, at every hamlet by the riverside, the inhabitants,
seeing the travellers speeding to almost certain death among the rapids,
rushed to the bank, gesticulating and shouting warnings, which, alas!
misunderstood by the Europeans, doubtless hastened the tragical climax.
And this is by far the most reasonable hypothesis, for, had any of these
natives desired to compass the destruction of the exploring party, there
was no need for them to raise a finger or a voice—the rocks in the river
would accomplish all that was necessary. That they had no sentiments of
ill-will towards Park is manifest from the fact that the Sariki-n-Yauri
(king of Yelwa) had provided him with all necessary transport, and was
himself a heavy loser in canoes and men by the disaster. I laboured
patiently to obtain the true facts of the story, and felt rewarded by the
hope that, in the future, the Bussa folks may be acquitted of so cowardly
and cruel a deed.

Another theory about the Borgus which, to the best of my belief, is
entirely erroneous, is their supposed connexion with early Christianity.
Major Mockler Ferryman remarks that ‘they (the Borgus) themselves assert
that their belief is in one Kisra, a Jew, who gave his life for the sins
of mankind.’ I was much astonished to find that this idea is utterly
fallacious, and is not even known to the people. In the first place,
Kisra, or rather Kishra, is buried close to Bussa, and his tomb can be
seen by any one, which immediately disposes of the possibility that the
Borgus, in honouring him, refer in any way to Jesus Christ.

Kishra was a Mahomedan pure and simple; he lived—so the tradition runs—in
Mecca, during the lifetime of Mahomed, and beginning to prove himself
positively a rival to the Prophet, was driven forth, with his large
following, and apparently drifted eventually down to Borgu. His memory
is deeply honoured and revered, but entirely as a warrior king, and
in no sense as the pioneer of any special religion. Certain rites and
ceremonies of the most frankly Pagan description are still performed
at his burying-place, the site of which is well-defined and, as I have
already said, visible to all.

The Borgus to-day, whatever their previous record may be, could not, by
any stretch of imagination, be called a war-like race. They are absolute
Pagans, and appear to be still very low in the order of civilization;
their progress has perhaps been hindered by their being somewhat apart
from the large Emirates and busier centres of the Protectorate: they
are also separated by their peculiar language and customs. In Bussa
itself a language quite distinct even from Borgu is spoken, which
greatly increases the difficulty of obtaining reliable historical
information from them. They are the quietest and most law-abiding folks
imaginable—indeed, I have heard it said of them that ‘they have not
the intelligence to commit a crime!’ They do not trade, and appear to
have an unlimited capacity for sitting silent and motionless, dirty and
unclothed, before their huts, gazing vacantly into space. Their farming
is as scanty as their need for food-stuffs will permit; just sufficient
is grown to save the little communities from want, and not a square yard
more! The villagers on the river-bank are fishermen, and live greatly
on river oysters, as is attested by the enormous heaps of oyster-shells
surrounding each hamlet. These oysters are found on the rocks at lowest
water, and though we never attempted to eat them, the shells interested
us greatly, answering exactly to the description of the _Aetheria
semilunata_, having very rough outsides, and the interior showing a very
beautiful mother-of-pearl appearance—exquisitely iridescent, with raised
pearly blisters. We cherished visions of discovering ‘Niger pearls,’ but
that dream, I fear, will have to be realized by some one else!

Sir Frederick Lugard was perfectly correct in ascribing the invincibility
of the Borgus to their reputation for a knowledge of witchcraft and
deadly poisons; they are more deeply steeped in ‘Ju-ju’ and superstition
of all kinds than any African natives I have come across. One firm
article of their faith is the ‘Tsafi’ or ‘speaking of oracles,’ the
message being received by a ‘priest’ who, while holding a freshly killed
fowl in one hand and rattling a calabash full of seeds in the other,
announces that the ‘god’ speaks to him in these sounds. A curious test
for ‘false witness’—a matter of very frequent occurrence—is for the two
people concerned to mix a handful of earth taken from in front of the
Sariki’s compound in a bowl of water: a portion of this mixture is drunk
by the disputants, and also by the Sariki himself, to prove that it is
not poisoned. Shortly, very shortly, he who has sworn falsely swells up
to an enormous size and dies in torment! Such implicit faith is placed
in this method of ascertaining the truth that my husband was frequently
implored to make use of it, for it is said that no man who has not a
clear conscience would dare to submit to it—and this I quite believe.

On one occasion while we were at Bussa, a prisoner was brought in with
terrible festering wounds on his arms and wrists, the explanation—quite
placidly given—being that his captors (the inhabitants of a remote
village) having secured him with ropes, and so cut into the flesh, became
aware that he was a ‘witch’ and _would fly away_; to avoid which disaster
they had ‘made medicine’—some unspeakable compound—and poured it over
the prisoner’s head and shoulders. This treatment had produced appalling
blood-poisoning, and though I cannot vouch for what he can do from a
flying point of view, the poor witch will never use his hand and arm
again.

The most precious and sacred possession of the Bussa people is a couple
of drums said to have been brought by Kishra from Mecca and treasured
ever since. These drums are kept in a small house built for the purpose,
and watched over day and night by their own keepers, rigorously and
jealously guarded; and, but for a lucky accident, we might have left
Bussa without obtaining a glimpse of them. Most fortunately a festival
occurred, when the drums were exhibited in the open, and we seized the
opportunity of inspecting them. Their antiquity was undoubted, and
we decided that they had a distinctly Egyptian appearance, being, in
reality, I think, great water basins; they were made of solid brass,
and were about the size of large wash-tubs, covered roughly with
ox-hide, to convert them into drums. We hunted eagerly for inscriptions
or hieroglyphics, of which there were none whatever, and one of us
ventured to photograph them, but owing to the crowd and the dust, and the
universal reluctance to have their ‘Ju-ju’ submitted to the higher Ju-ju
of the camera, we felt obliged to respect the people’s feelings and make
no insistence on obtaining a successful photograph.

On the morning of October 4, while we sat at breakfast in the verandah,
appeared a ragged, scantily-clothed native, with a sheepish smile,
holding in his hand a tiny bunch of long, soft, pale fawn-coloured
fluff—a ‘bush’ kitten of some kind evidently, scarcely a week old, blind
and helpless, chiefly remarkable for his large round ears, conspicuously
barred with black and cream-colour. Delightedly, I seized him, and
overwhelmed the bringer with streams of eager questions, which he, good
man, was quite unable to answer, and, having rewarded him with the sum
of eighteenpence (which produced transports of gratitude) we applied
ourselves to the task of ‘bringing up’ our new acquisition. His sole
desire, poor mite, was to crawl to warm darkness, so we arranged for him
a small wooden box filled with cotton wool, and here he slept away the
first week or two of his existence, while we anxiously improvised for
him a feeding-bottle out of an empty eau-de-Cologne bottle, fitted with
a piece of rubber tubing! This device proved brilliantly successful, and
‘Balu,’ as we called him on account of his woolly, bear-like appearance,
throve and grew, gaining strength and spirits daily. His education was
confided to an orange-coloured domestic cat, who had been presented to
the household, and though the latter laboured under the disadvantage
of being a kitten himself—and a male kitten, too, and presumably
unacquainted with nursery customs—he devoted himself absolutely to the
new-comer, and would spend hours licking the long pale fur, which puzzled
and concerned him sorely. But he stuck manfully to his task, and we
usually had to rescue Balu, a miserable little object like a drowned
rat, with wet hair clogged all over his shivering body. We discovered him
to be the Serval or Tiger cat (_Felis Serval_), and he speedily proved
himself the most fascinating and playful of pets. He showed the most
furious antipathy to natives—in his earlier days fleeing at the sight of
one, and later, standing his ground, spitting and growling, his ears flat
on his head, and a relentless little paw ready to strike at the intruder.
But of white people he had no fear, and would walk up to any stranger to
inspect and sniff him, and usually began inconsequently to play with him
or sharpen his claws in his putties!

He showed high intelligence when quite tiny, and when hungry he would
trot off and try to fish his ‘bottle’ out of the water-cooler, where it
was kept, which effort usually ended in over-balancing and an impromptu
bath!

To assure ourselves of his whereabouts and safety, we had a couple of
shillings beaten out into tiny silver bells, which were tied round his
neck, and greatly assisted us to find him when he was leading us wild
dances, hiding under bushes, tearing up and down the borders and in and
out of the sunflowers.

His first essays towards solid food were somewhat disastrous, taking
the form of catching and eating large locusts, with an accompaniment of
furious growls. Doubtless he found some which were not wholesome, for we
rescued him twice when almost dead—the result of nocturnal expeditions,
followed by violent sickness and exhaustion. This decided us to ‘wean the
infant,’ which we accomplished by means of tiny spoonfuls of porridge,
gradually progressing to scraps of lightly cooked chicken. Once he
commenced to lap milk and eagerly eat cooked meat and eggs we heaved a
gigantic sigh of relief, for our rearing troubles were ended, and Balu
fattened and grew—almost visibly—his kitten fluff gradually disappeared,
and he emerged a most beautiful little animal, bearing a magnificent coat
of tawny colour, striped and marked with black, the chest and stomach
being pure white with black spots and stripes.

I have thought it worth while to describe our pet at this length as his
kind is, I believe, extremely rarely seen, and is considered absolutely
untameable. Our success in this direction we owe, no doubt, to the fact
that, by a most lucky accident, we obtained him so extraordinarily young,
and, with unremitting care, were fortunate enough to bring him safely
through his babyhood.

As he grew older his play naturally became rather fierce, as his teeth
and claws developed; but his temper was always perfectly sweet, and the
manifold scratches with which we were both adorned were all the results
of the glorious games he would play by the hour, and regularly, each
night, little paws would scratch at my mosquito net, and urgent demands
for admission would be made, when a tired happy kitten would creep in,
curl himself on the blanket at my feet, and sleep blissfully, till ‘early
tea’ brought milk and more play-times!

At this time we were greatly cheered and enlivened by the arrival of the
British Commissioners of the Anglo-French Boundary Commission, on their
way up river. They spent two days with us—on their part, I think, rather
glad to ‘spread’ themselves after their cramped journey up the river, and
for us it was a ‘whole holiday’ and one we thoroughly enjoyed, so that
it was with real regret that we speeded them on the next stage of their
travels.

But we had no chance of further stagnation, as, to our great delight,
orders had even then arrived transferring my husband to the Nupe
Province, and the prospect of making a home for ourselves at Bida was as
pleasant an undertaking as we could possibly have desired. In December
Mr. Fremantle arrived, and, after handing the Province over to him, we
left Bussa on the 21st, and, as we dropped down the swift stream, we
forgot, as one always does, all the disappointments and drawbacks of
Borgu, and remembered most distinctly all its charms and the kindly
friendships we had formed there.

[Illustration: THE STEEL CANOE IN WHICH WE DESCENDED THE BUSSA RAPIDS.
(p. 184)]

[Illustration: THE TENNIS COURT, BIDA. (p. 188)]




CHAPTER X

Bida


The journey down river was less eventful than the one we had made the
previous January; it commenced with an eight mile walk round the Mullale
Rapid, while the steel barge, emptied of most of its contents, plunged
and tossed like a small Noah’s Ark on the rushing river. The rest of the
‘bad water’ we negotiated in the barge ourselves, and some of it was
quite exciting, the fall of the water being quite appreciable.

Christmas Day was spent on the river below Jebba, and on the 27th the
familiar outline of the hulk at Mureji loomed large ahead, and we found
ourselves among our old friends. We met Captain Mercadier, one of the
French Commissioners of the Anglo-French Boundary Commission, on his way
up to Bussa, which meeting was fortunate, as we were able to give him all
necessary information about his journey and the transport arrangements
made for him before we left. For this he expressed his gratitude with all
the delightful courtesy so characteristic of our French neighbours, a
courtesy we had more than once experienced in Borgu, where our Province
marched with part of French Dahomey.

We paddled up the Kaduna in a steel canoe, slept at Dakmon, and in the
morning mounted the horses sent for us and rode along the shady road
winding away from the river and over the low hills to Bida.

The first instalment of our ‘welcome’ was a dainty breakfast on the road
spread under the shady trees and greatly appreciated after a ten mile
ride, and that disposed of, Mr. Lafone, the junior Resident, who had been
in charge of the Province, arrived, escorting the Emir, accompanied by
his ‘Court’ and, it seemed to us, most of the inhabitants of the city.
It was an interesting meeting; one’s mind went instinctively back to the
occasion of our last visit to Bida, when something of the same sort had
happened, and one realized that five years in the placid lives of these
simple people make little or no mark. But the Emir himself had aged very
remarkably, having passed, seemingly, out of vigorous manhood into more
than middle age, but his proportions were, if anything, more generous
than ever, and his emotion and pleasure at seeing us was touching and
sincere.

While ‘the Sahib,’ with his unerring memory for faces, that most precious
gift, recognized and saluted the various officials of the Emir’s Court, I
noticed unmistakable surprise mixed with the cordiality of the greeting
offered to me. I suppose the dear souls had expected me to have been
divorced or sold long ago!

After a few minutes’ chat with the European officers who had so kindly
come out to welcome us, we all remounted and commenced the hot dusty
ride to Bida, drums banging, horns braying, ‘praises’ shouted in hoarse
stentorian tones, the usual dashing about of horsemen, and breathless
rushing to and fro of the crowd on foot, a curious kaleidoscope of varied
colours appearing and disappearing in the glittering haze of dust.

Though we both felt the sincerest pleasure and contentment with all
things, it was a relief to all of us when the police guard of honour had
been inspected, we had passed through the Residency Gateway and the gay
crowd was wending light-heartedly towards the city, and we six white
folks sat down in the cool bungalow, and gaily drank to ‘Bida and the New
Year’ in cool and delicious champagne cup which our hosts had provided in
honour of our arrival and the festive season.

We settled down at once in our new and comfortable quarters, which
seemed actually luxurious after the mud houses of Borgu, and, when we
had time to inspect the compound, found a great interest in noting the
changes and improvements since our last visit. It was charmingly laid
out and thoroughly well planted with orange, lime, and mango trees,
showing every sign of care and interest, a thing extremely comforting to
a gardener who had always struggled against ‘fearful odds’; an excellent
lawn tennis court had been made of ‘native cement,’ formed in the first
instance of mud patted and beaten to the solidity almost of stone,
then washed over with a solution of locust beans, soaked in water for
forty-eight hours, a dark-coloured evil-smelling mixture which served to
bind all the loose particles on the court and gave it a black metallic
shine. I, of course, found endless occupations in a field so desirable
as my new home, while my husband bent all his energies to studying the
different conditions of a new Province; in this work he had the most
loyal help from every one, and I fancy that we shall always look back on
our four months at Bida as a time instinct with warm friendship and good
feeling.

The Residency stood considerably higher than the surrounding country,
and I never tired of the picture from our verandah, where the city lay,
about a mile distant, in a gentle hollow outlined by the pink wall, and
crowded inside with dense and luxuriant trees and clusters of closely-set
thatched roofs with, here and there, the more imposing buildings rising
rosy-red among the humbler grass roofs.

We made close acquaintance with the market, which, in its way, interested
me even more than that of Kano, being less extensive and so more
accessible. It was always a pretty and animated scene, the open squares
and spaces crowded at sunset with a dense throng of happy folks, selling,
buying, chattering, shouting, and laughing, moving in a haze of dust, all
apparently giving far greater heed to the social aspect of the gathering
than any serious commercial enterprise. The market continued until long
after dark, and the flares and native lamps made a weird and fascinating
effect. The goods offered were of the most varied description, articles
of brass and leather work, grass mats, fishing nets, cloth, beads,
sugar-cane, and food-stuffs of all kinds—even wooden doors were for sale,
ready to be fitted to any clay hut, in fact a highly representative
collection of the heterogeneous miscellany presented in any West African
market.

On January 25 occurred the ‘Great Sallah,’ a Mahomedan festival which
appears to commemorate the Sacrifice of Isaac—a sheep being killed
ceremonially on the occasion. We assembled ourselves outside the city
wall, and, sitting under an improvised shelter, watching the seated
thousands waiting patiently in the sunshine, it would not have seemed
strange to me to see the Disciples passing down the irregular lines,
distributing the loaves and fishes to the hungry listeners.

Presently the Limam’s voice rose clear and shrill, away in the distance,
under the shade of a mighty tree where the Emir and his court had their
places; the thousands rose to their feet, and as the sonorous Arabic
pealed out on the hot still air, the prayers began. It was a wonderful
and moving spectacle; the reverent responses rose from the assemblage
like a muffled roar, but perhaps the most astonishing feature of all was
the prostration when the huge throng fell on their faces as one man,
reminding us of a vast field of corn swept by a sudden gust.

The prayers finished, we were conducted to the Emir’s seat, where special
prayers were offered for us all, each being named in turn, strictly in
order of precedence, not forgetting the High Commissioner and the two
former Residents of the Province, Major Burdon and Mr. Goldsmith, both
dearly loved and remembered.

[Illustration: THE GREAT SALLA. (p. 189)]

[Illustration: THE PROSTRATION. (p. 190)]

Shortly after this festival our little community was reinforced by Mr.
and Mrs. Bargery of the C.M.S. They occupied a large compound outside
the city, and we all admired the business-like energy with which they
settled down and ‘got square,’ turning two unattractive mud houses into
a bright pretty home in an incredibly short time. The days slipped
away, February drifted into March, and March into April, clouds began
to gather in the hard blue sky, and lightning and distant thunder
proclaimed the approaching rains; our thoughts turned towards ‘leave,’
and only one event, but that an important one for us, remained before
we left Nigeria—the arrival of our new High Commissioner, Sir Percy
Girouard, who had succeeded Sir Frederick Lugard. He arrived at Katcha
on the Niger on April 13, where my husband was ready with two members
of his staff, to receive him. About twenty of the highest officials of
the Bida Court and their followers had been despatched also by the Emir
as a mark of his fealty and loyalty to the Government. By all these,
the High Commissioner was escorted to within ten miles of Bida, where
the remainder of the European staff and the police guard of honour had
assembled. The Emir, with the rest of his Court and five or six thousand
followers, mounted and on foot, was also waiting to receive him, and
accompany him triumphantly to the Residency. The cloud of dust raised by
the horsemen was visible for three or four miles as they approached, so
the High Commissioner must have had a choky time, to say the least of
it! We did our best to induce him to remain for the night, but with his
characteristic energy he determined to push on the same evening, and camp
five or six miles further on, to the north of the town, towards Zungeru.

My husband’s leave had already been sanctioned, and, on mentioning the
fact, his dismay can be imagined when Sir Percy Girouard apparently
demurred, saying that all the senior officers appeared to be proceeding
on leave directly he arrived! I need hardly say, however, that he would
not hear of our remaining longer, as we had already completed eighteen
months, and we therefore left Bida, as we had arranged on April 20.

It was, in truth, disappointing to have to come away at such an
interesting stage in Nigeria’s development; a page was being turned
in its history, the old order was changing, and the long projected
railway was to become a solid fact, a change that could not fail to
prove an immense advantage. Caravan trading, so far, had attracted all
the energies of many thousands of the inhabitants, who had employed
their time in lengthy journeys from the interior to the coast and back;
with the railway in operation this anachronism would lose its _raison
d’être_ and gradually cease to exist; much greater numbers would then
be available for cultivation, a gain of the highest importance, as the
future prosperity of the country must depend greatly on its agricultural
success, especially in the direction of cotton. As one who has watched
its growth and steady advance during the last five years, I should like
to close my book with the heartiest good wishes for the future success
and advancement of the country we both love so well.




Part II

HOUSEHOLD HINTS




CHAPTER I

The Home


This chapter is, of necessity, addressed chiefly to those who are
permanently settled at headquarters, either Lokoja or Zungeru, as the
Political Officer and his wife will, naturally, have to abandon all hopes
of conveying household furniture, etc., to a far distant objective, owing
to the great difficulty and expense of transport; the chapter on Camp
Life will be found more useful by them.

The house itself is a wooden bungalow, or, at the out-stations, a
native-built clay house; in either case it consists of four walls,
a ceiling and a floor—and a wide shady verandah. In the distant
out-stations, of course, there is no furniture at all, to speak of,
except the camp outfit belonging to each official, which he carries with
him, and which includes a camp bed, wash-stand, bath, one small table,
one chair and a Lord’s lantern. But we are ‘getting on’ in Nigeria, and
it is now found possible to do a little more for every one in the way of
plain furniture at headquarters, so that I do not think any one need walk
into an utterly empty bungalow nowadays. However, it is obvious that
anything in the way of ‘home comforts’ must be brought out independently
from England, as there is not even the opportunity, which occurs
constantly in India, of buying second-hand furniture from neighbours on
the move.

Fortunately, very little is needed: I should advise investing in a few
wicker chairs and light tables either at Madeira, or at home; they are no
trouble to bring and are very cheap. It is worth noting that the faster
line of steamers do not always call at Madeira now, so that, unless one
is certain of calling at the Canaries, it is wisest to bring wicker
furniture direct from England.

A few yards of a pretty, light chintz or cretonne can be converted into
chair cushions, stuffed with native cotton, and will furnish a room
amazingly. It is well, too, to bring out some lengths of cheap muslin,
coloured or white, as fancy dictates, for curtains, etc. A coarse kind
of muslin can be bought locally, and, when faintly dyed with indigo,
it becomes quite a pretty pale blue, very cool-looking, and can be
constantly renewed when faded. A barrel, containing a small outfit of
crockery and glass, makes one quite independent of the local stores,
which, at most, may be able to replace breakages—after a fashion! A
supply of enamel paint will enable you to give quite an ‘air’ to the
rough shelves which can be made locally, beside lengthening their
lives considerably. For the floor, nothing is nicer or cheaper than an
Indian _dhurri_ or cotton carpet, but, as the bungalows are all fitted
with linoleum, no more is really needed than a few of the artistically
coloured grass mats, made chiefly at Bida, and found almost everywhere;
they cost about three shillings each, rising to six shillings, according
to the distance from Bida, and are quite delightful. No one could fail
to be pleased with the brightly coloured native cloths, or to find them
useful for covering rough ugly tables and unsightly deck-chairs, and for
making portierés, etc. You will also find Bida brass-work of a highly
decorative sort, charming, quaintly-shaped little burnt earthenware
jugs from Ilorin, carved wooden stools, boasting of from ten to twenty
legs—cut from one solid block of wood—from Ibi, queer carvings from away
down south of Kabba, the brilliantly tinted Hausa leather work, fashioned
into cushion covers, bags, purses, and an endless variety of articles,
and carved and ‘poker-worked’ calabashes, etc., all of which will help to
cover the walls and give the room a home-like, or, at least, an occupied
look.

At Kano, we lived in a great vault-like apartment in the Residency
(formerly the Emir’s summer palace), and though, at first, it presented
an appearance of utter gloom and desolation, an extraordinary improvement
was effected in a couple of hours by an improvised sideboard, boxes piled
up to serve as tables, and covered with gaily-coloured cloths, the
pinky-red walls decorated with sketches and prints, a few gorgeously hued
Japanese paper wall hangings scattered about, and the clay floor covered
with grass mats.

The walls of a wooden bungalow are usually of boarding, either painted
white or a horrible ‘duck’s egg’ blue, or else varnished a rather
dark and monotonous brown, so the whole room will need colour as much
as possible. A few pictures are an immense help in decorating, and,
nowadays, such beautiful and artistic framed prints can be bought so
cheap, it would be well worth while to bring out half a dozen. Of course,
if you sketch yourself the problem of wall decoration is solved; polished
brown boards make a perfect background for water-colour sketches,
unframed, but placed in gilt mounts, so that all you need is a packet of
tacks and a hammer. If you cannot do your own sketching, make a point,
before leaving England, of pillaging those among your friends who do;
no one, I think, could resist a pathetic appeal for a pretty sketch to
carry away into far Africa! And, indeed, it is a joy sometimes, when the
temperature is unpleasantly high, little worries abounding, and _Africa_
asserting itself unduly, to be able to glance occasionally at a sketch of
some English woodland, or a corner of a picturesque village.

[Illustration: MY WRITING TABLE. (p. 198)]

[Illustration: THE RESIDENCY, BIDA. (p. 200)]

Whilst we were in India, we had, among our treasures, a most beautifully
executed water-colour sketch of one or two deodars, standing out from
a cool, wet, grey mist on some hill-side in Kashmir, and we used to
consider this picture as a most valuable tonic during a Punjaub ‘hot
weather.’ While on this subject, let me add, from personal experience,
that sketch-books and blocks will be ruined during the rainy season,
unless carefully wrapped in waterproof paper, and the best kind of paints
for standing the climate are the ‘slow-drying’ kind, in tubes, sold by
Windsor & Newton.

If lamps are brought out, they should be plain metal ones, with punkah
tops; extra wicks must not be forgotten, and at least a dozen spare
chimneys are quite necessary, on account of breakages—the simple plan
of boiling the chimneys before using them should never be neglected, as
they do not break nearly so easily. A folding wire frame with three or
four simple paper shades is a more simple arrangement than a globe, and
far more serviceable. The servants will be found absolutely omnivorous
over kerosene oil; they spill it, they light the kitchen fire with it,
and I have heard a despairing bachelor housekeeper declare that they
_drink_ it, so rapidly does it disappear! Kerosene is, of course, very
dear, and more so up country than in Lokoja; I have often found it a
distinct economy to insist on the pantries and kitchen burning native
oil in native lamps when far away from headquarters; these little lamps
give quite a bright light and do not smoke—they are also most useful for
night-lights.

It will be found better and far cheaper in the end to bring out all house
and table linen from home, even dusters and chamois leathers, though the
coarsest sort of native cloth makes excellent kitchen cloths and stable
rubbers. Plate powder is still, I think, practically an unknown luxury
in Northern Nigeria, and silver is usually cleaned with bath-brick! A
process which may well be substituted is to wash the silver well in hot
water, containing a little Scrubb’s Ammonia, and then polish it with a
chamois leather; nothing keeps it in such good order, and the average
‘boy,’ though untiring in putting _on_ the plate powder, feels no
inducement to take it _off_. But, alas! the friendly ‘Scrubb’s’ is not
always available, so that, as far as possible, articles of real silver
should be confined to toilet things and tea-spoons. A plated tea-spoon is
a horror, but I once had the pleasure of seeing four of my silver ones
light-heartedly thrown into the Niger, along with a basin of soapy water!

A set of carpenter’s tools, and a collection of hooks, screws, nails
and tacks will be found perfectly invaluable; armed with these, and,
I hope, the help of the foregoing hints, the little bare room can be
transformed into a bright pretty sitting-room where every one will enjoy
coming, and will feel it more ‘like home.’ Sometimes space does not
admit of a separate dining-room, but this need not necessarily spoil the
appearance of the sitting-room. The dinner-table, when not in use, can
wear a gaily coloured native cloth, a few books, photographs, etc., and a
well-polished, neatly arranged sideboard is no eyesore. This latter, by
the way, must have its legs placed in saucers or tins fitted with water,
with a little kerosene added, to save the sugar, jam, cake, etc., from
the incursions of millions of hungry ants.

Let the filter stand on a box or table on the breeziest side of the
verandah; almost every one has a special plan, or a pet filter, so that
no rule can be laid down to suit everybody. I think that, perhaps,
the evolving of cool drinks is more a matter of personal endeavour
and experience than almost any other department of housekeeping: it
is an attainment so very necessary that it is attempted by every one,
more or less, and the best advice I can give is to seize upon the host
who provides you with really cold soda or sparklets, and find out how
he arrives at them! In Lokoja and Zungeru there is a supply of water
condensed from the river; this we have poured at once into a Berkefeld
drip filter, merely with a view to getting rid of the ‘condensed’ taste,
though this can also be accomplished as well by pouring the water from a
good height several times from one vessel to another. Ordinary water can
be boiled, then pumped rapidly through the large foot-pump Berkefeld
filter into the drip filter; this first filtering saving much wear and
tear to the candles of the latter. The water is then drawn off into
bottles and placed in native earthenware coolers, which, being porous,
keep it delightfully cool. These coolers are extremely cheap; they can
and must be frequently renewed to ensure perfect cleanliness, and can be
employed most usefully for cooling butter and cream as well as soda-water.

In one’s bedroom, little furniture is needed; in fact, I think the less
one has the better. This is distinctly fortunate, as there is none
forthcoming! In Nigeria, we have not yet arrived at the stage of walnut
wardrobes and pier-glasses, and a new-comer may be appalled at the lack
of accommodation for stowing clothes. I have found that clothing is
much better not shut up in boxes, unless they are damp-proof tin ones,
and even these must be carried out into the sunshine, and the contents
sunned nearly every day in the rainy season. It is almost incredible how
quickly clothes will acquire a mouldy smell, and appearance of mildew,
unless they are constantly looked at and aired. Any native carpenter
will be able to make rows of stout wooden pegs for hanging clothes, and
it is far better to have them so, as, when disturbed daily, and hung out
in the sun for an hour or so, they will not harbour mosquitoes to any
great extent. Where one is dealing with a clay wall, it answers well
to stretch a length of native cloth tightly along the wall, immediately
below the nails or pegs, to protect light coloured clothes from the
reddish dust, always rubbing off. All boxes should be placed on blocks
of wood or bricks, on account of white ants, and all boots and shoes on
shelves, _never_ on the floor; foot-gear must be kept in constant wear,
and also be inspected carefully and polished daily. Insects of all kinds
abound; there is one whose special aim in life is to build little mud
palaces in any quiet spot, boots, shoes, folds of gowns, keyholes—even
in the bowl of a pipe, unused for a day or two. No corner of any room
can be left undisturbed even for a few days, and it is advisable to have
each room completely cleared once a week, and the floors washed with a
weak solution of creolin. It has a pleasant tarry smell, and acts as an
excellent deterrent to mosquitoes and sandflies.

While on the subject of mosquitoes, I should like to mention (what I
imagine to be a small discovery of our own five years ago) that it is an
excellent plan to sew a strip of calico or nankeen, about eighteen inches
deep, all round the mosquito net, just above where it tucks in under the
mattress. This greatly protects one’s hands and feet, should they touch
the net during the night, otherwise they will be devoured. Moreover, the
strip is not wide enough to keep away any air or make one feel ‘stuffy.’
An air-cushion is a most useful possession, being so easy to stow away in
a bedding valise; ours, we found, were greatly coveted by the boys, who
regarded them with some awe, and designated them as ‘breeze pillows’!

The whole subject of small comforts and house decoration is a most
fascinating one, but it is so much a matter of personal taste and
activity that it does not seem to me to be necessary to add more to
these very general hints than to express the conviction that no English
housewife in West Africa—if she is ‘worth her salt’—will spare herself in
the endeavour to, at least, turn ‘quarters’ into ‘home,’ even if only for
a few months.




CHAPTER II

The Household


The household in Nigeria, and indeed, all over West Africa, is by no
means the complicated affair that one has to cope with in India, and
housekeeping is reduced to the greatest simplicity.

The staff consists of a cook, with an attendant satellite, called a
‘cook’s mate,’ a steward, or ‘boy,’ with usually, in a married household
at least, an under steward, or perhaps a couple of small boys to assist
generally in the housework and table service. There may be an orderly
attached, but his duties consist rather in the airing of clothes and
boxes, cleaning of guns and boots, and carrying of letters, etc.

Each pony has his own ‘doki-boy,’ whose duties are fully described in the
chapter on the stable, and the mistress may, in her enthusiasm, decide to
employ a regular gardener. All these good people live in the compound,
the only outside servant being the laundress. This lady is only to be
found at headquarters (she is usually a Coast woman), in out-stations,
and in the bush the washing is done—generally with inconspicuous
success—by one’s own boys, or the wife of a doki-boy. It is distinctly
useful to bring out from home one or two flat-irons, and make a point of
‘getting up’ one’s most cherished muslin blouses, etc., oneself.

Wages are high, absurdly so, but the demand for fairly capable servants
is so great, and the supply so small, that there is little prospect
of the present scale of pay being reasonably reduced. Also, alas! in
many bachelor establishments, the standard of excellence in service is
not high enough to produce a really good class of servants, and I am
quite certain that any Englishwoman who has kept house in India would
absolutely _gasp_ at the quality and quantity of work done by a highly
paid ‘boy,’ in possession of most eulogistic testimonials from previous
masters. The following is a fair average of wages paid, per month, all
over the country: in some cases, servants of an undesirable kind may be
engaged for less, but this is no real economy, while in some other cases
even higher wages are paid.

                                            £   _s._ _d._

    Cook                                    2    0    0
      (If an Accra boy £3 or £3 10_s._)
    Cook’s Mate                             0   15    0
    Head Steward                            2    0    0
    Under Steward                           1    0    0
    Laundress                               1    0    0
    Doki-boy                                1    0    0
    Gardener                                1    0    0

Roughly £100 a year, for the services of seven people, all lazy and
stupid, mostly untruthful, and frequently dishonest, ignorant of the
first principles of order and cleanliness, and, unmistakably, considering
Missis rather a bore when she insists on trying to inculcate these.

My personal experience with house servants is not a very varied one, as
we still have some of those we engaged on first coming to West Africa
five years ago; but, in fairness to them, I must not omit to say that
I have only _very rarely_ found any one of them in the least degree
untruthful, and that I know them to be absolutely honest; they have never
stolen a single article or a halfpenny from either of us during these
years.

Servants may be of all languages and tribes, and they have no ‘caste.’
Some are Mahomedans, some Pagans, some professing Christianity, but their
religious convictions do not appear to affect any of them very seriously.
One important point for the new-comer is, that one servant, at least—the
head steward for choice—should speak good, intelligible English; most of
the Coast boys, and those trained by the Roman Catholic missionaries at
Onitsha, can do so.

With the exception of the cook and steward, our household is required
absolutely to speak Hausa, and nothing else, to us and each other, which
saves endless confusion, and gives a comfortable sense of security that
one’s orders are correctly transmitted to doki-boys, gardener, etc.

It is the custom to pay a certain percentage of the wages weekly, usually
two shillings per head, for ‘chop money’ (subsistence allowance), and the
balance at the end of each month, which arrangement shows ingenuously
what a solid, clear profit the household makes. This balance of pay is
generally expended, on the spot, in the acquiring of such luxuries as a
gaily striped umbrella, or a smart pair of ‘English’ boots.

The majority of servants are reckless gamblers, and a perfect network
of lending, borrowing, and extorting of an exorbitant rate of interest,
prevails amongst them, in spite of strictest prohibitions on the subject.


THE COOK AND HIS KITCHEN

The Nigerian kitchen is arranged on the Indian plan—apart from the house,
and just as much inspection and supervision will have to be exercised.

Kitchen appliances of a rough-and-ready kind can be bought at the local
stores, but it is far more satisfactory to bring most of them direct from
England, especially a nest of aluminium saucepans, their lightness being
a great advantage while marching.

At headquarters, a kitchen table, some rough shelves and pegs will be
available, and a meat-safe, which, however, has to be accommodated on
the breeziest corner of the verandah.

The mistress will do well to walk into the kitchen, as a matter of
course, at any hour of the day: the cook and his mate will, possibly,
like to sleep there, and if the visit is made regularly, after breakfast,
the beds or mats can be whisked out of sight, for the time being, and the
malpractice never discovered. In Lokoja and Zungeru the kitchens are now
fitted with very good little ranges, which are a great improvement on the
open, brick fireplaces of earlier days. I remember well, the day that
mine was first put in, going to the kitchen to see how it worked, and
finding the cook, radiant with pride and pleasure, lighting the fire _in
the oven_. The fuel consists entirely of wood. In out stations, the poor
_chef_ has a good deal to contend with, usually an open fire for ordinary
cooking (on the floor) and for an oven, an ingenious arrangement of a
large country pot half buried in the ground; into this, blazing wood is
thrust until the interior is quite hot, when the fuel is hauled out, the
cake or bread popped in, a flat piece of tin or iron laid on the top, and
piled up with burning wood. It can be readily understood that an oven of
this description makes successful baking a matter of some uncertainty.

The kitchen table must be scrubbed with soap and water daily, the pans
and utensils scoured, and the walls occasionally whitewashed. You will
find your cook slightly bored with your insistence on these small
details, but always polite, cheerful and amenable. He is a teachable
person, too, and takes a kindly interest in one’s making of cakes,
sweets, etc., but his knowledge of cookery is strictly limited—the
veriest tyro in India earning ten rupees a month is a _cordon bleu_
compared with him.

Housekeeping in his department is of the utmost simplicity: he turns
up immediately after breakfast, smiling genially, usually arrayed in
a spotless white suit, or a suit of pyjamas of striking pattern and
colouring, a jaunty straw hat in his hand, and immaculate white shoes
on his feet. He gives you the account of the previous day’s marketing,
you reproach him for the toughness of the mutton, the heaviness of the
bread, and the total absence of the savoury; all of which he takes most
philosophically, and explains glibly, to his own entire exoneration. You
then give him half-a-crown (or, to save trouble, ten shillings twice a
week), and indicate tentatively what you would prefer for luncheon and
dinner. It is no use ordering dishes definitely; they never appear,
and when you indignantly demand the devilled kidneys arranged for, the
tranquil answer: ‘Cook say, kidney no live for market to-day,’ defeats
without soothing you.

So you let him depart, to work his wicked will, stalking off under
a patriotic sun umbrella, striped in sections of red, white and blue
cotton, followed by the satellite, bearing the market basket, while you,
the anxious housewife, must simply put your trust in Providence and hope
for the best.

[Illustration: ‘AMELIA,’ A YOUNG GIRAFFE BROUGHT HOME BY THE LATE CAPTAIN
PHILLIPS, D.S.O. (p. 210)]

[Illustration: ‘CHUKU,’ A NATIVE DOG—RESCUED DURING THE ARO-CHUKU
EXPEDITION. (P. 223)]

The average cook has little or no discrimination, if the menu is
left entirely to him: we once found ourselves guests at a bachelor
dinner-party, where the feast commenced with chicken soup, followed by
stewed chicken, which was, in its turn, succeeded by minced chicken;
finally, to our despair, the board was graced by a couple of roast
chickens—and this with an unlimited supply of mutton and beef in the
market.

You must be prepared to get very indifferent meat; the animals are
badly slaughtered, and cut up without any regard to joints, etc., so
that beef is really useless, except for making soup or mince, so tough
is it. The mutton usually grows on a goat, and is also tough, which, I
suppose, accounts in part for the eternal chicken taking so prominent a
place in the day’s menu. Tough meat, by the way, can be much improved
by wrapping the joint in paw-paw leaves for an hour or two; if left too
long it will decay altogether, so personal supervision is necessary—the
cook does not profess to understand such faddy nonsense! Turkeys can be
reared in the compound quite easily, also ducks; both are excellent, and
there is always a pleasant possibility of occasional additions to the
larder, in the shape of guinea fowl, bush fowl, pigeons, and venison,
which, when hung for twenty-four to forty-eight hours (according to the
temperature), is absolutely delicious. The menu can always be kept from
monotony by small dishes, such as sheep and ox tongues, brain cutlets,
stuffed paw-paws—an excellent substitute for vegetable marrow—tomatoes,
‘farcies,’ or garden eggs, treated in the same way.

Personally, I do not care for native dishes, and ‘palm-oil chop’ is, to
my mind, an abomination; but ground-nut soup is very good indeed, and
should not be overlooked, especially as it is a delicacy that every cook
understands how to make. Fish can nearly always be had, so that once one
has taught the cook how to make real curries—as they are made in India—a
fair variety can easily be had, with little or no assistance from odious
and unwholesome tinned food.

I fear the _chef_ will not be found a great hand at puddings: his
inspirations do not soar much higher than banana fritters and cornflour
mould. I remember a painful incident which occurred at the commencement
of my career as a West African housekeeper, when the appearance of
an unexpected guest caused me to order an impromptu pudding, a sweet
omelette. When, in due course, the pudding appeared, looking deliciously
light and frizzling hot, a curious smell accompanied it, and the first
mouthful revealed it as a savoury omelette, highly seasoned with onions
and fresh chilis, filled with apricot jam! I have since heard of an
enterprising cook, who artistically tinted a cornflour mould bright blue,
with indigo. He can be taught to make very fair tart pastry, but, as a
rule, it is safer to confine oneself to fruit salads, trifles, and other
cold sweets, which one can prepare oneself. The impossibility of getting
fresh milk is, naturally, a great handicap in cooking, but ‘Ideal’ milk
is quite useful in preparing mayonnaise and many other sauces, and the
tinned cream (Golden Butterfly brand) sold by the Niger Company is almost
as good as the fresh article, as it can be whipped quite stiff if kept in
cold water for a few hours before opening.

Vegetables cannot be had regularly, unless the housekeeper is also a
gardener, and grows them herself. There is, however, a native spinach,
which is quite as good as the English kind, and grows like a weed.
Country tomatoes, garden eggs, okros, sweet potatoes, green paw-paws,
and yams are all of great use in supplying the table with the necessary
green food; but I feel sure that the housekeeper who reads the chapter
on Gardening will instantly decide to do better than tamely submit to
limiting her household to country produce of this kind.

At a pinch (when touring in forest country) we have found young Indian
corn, or maize, well boiled, not at all a bad substitute for other
vegetables, and, when the corns are boiled, then lightly browned over the
fire, they are excellent, eaten with butter, pepper and salt.

In the way of fruit, there are usually bananas to be had, pineapples in
the spring and summer, and occasionally oranges. In Lokoja the mangoes
are quite good, and I have had guavas and custard apples. The country
abounds in tiny limes, which are sold in great quantities, very cheap,
and make most delicious lemon squashes.


THE STEWARD AND HIS DUTIES

The head steward, or ‘boy,’ must be carefully chosen, and is worth
training, for in his hands lies the greater part of your daily comfort,
and to his shortcomings can be traced most of the irritability which is
recognized as a natural weakness of the dweller in West Africa.

He will require endless patience, and daily insistence on small details
of cleanliness and order, for he has a happy knack of carrying out an
order for five or six days, then quietly discontinuing it, and trusting
to his mistress’ preoccupation not to observe the omission. Never flatter
yourself that any system you have introduced, with apparent success, will
continue to work for a week without some supervision and inspection.
The genus ‘head boy’ is a light-hearted, easy-going, tractable sort of
creature; some are masterful and quarrelsome, some are placid and lazy,
but all of them like to have one or two small boys about the house, to
whom they can relegate most of their work, while they are swaggering in
the market, in spotless raiment, with redundant watch-chain and a sun
umbrella. Some, I am sorry to say, are bad, very, very bad, and I cannot
help feeling most strongly that more than one vigorous, valuable young
life has succumbed out here to sickness and death, mainly for the want
of proper attendance—better cooking and the small comforts and niceties
that every man requires, but is, usually, helpless to obtain and insist
upon for himself. I have seen unspeakable habits of dirt and slovenliness
prevailing amongst bachelors’ boys—yes, and dangerous ones too, tinned
food kept for days in open tins, and served up again to the unfortunate
master, cups and plates washed and wiped—well, it serves no purpose of
mine to recount these horrors, and it is only fair to add that I have
known boys whose skilful care, devotion and unselfishness towards sick
masters could hardly be excelled. I only hope that every Englishwoman who
spends even a few months in Nigeria will leave behind her two or three
servants inoculated with habits of scrupulous cleanliness, thoughtfulness
and common sense, to lighten the lot of some lonely man who now feels
uncomfortably that in his mother’s house at home the table-cloth is
_not_ hideously grubby and crooked, the milk and jam served in messy
tins, the glasses cloudy, and the forks and spoons more than doubtful,
but vaguely supposes all this is necessary in West Africa—_it isn’t!_

As a rule, I suppose the Coast boy makes the best head steward: he
speaks English, and has usually served a white master before. He acts
as housemaid and parlourmaid in one, starts his day with energetic
sweeping and some sketchy dusting, waits at table, cuts his master’s
hair, acts as valet generally, and is the spokesman and middle man
between his mistress and the rest of the household. He is responsible
for the existence and condition, good or otherwise, of nearly all of
your possessions; therefore, it really answers best to have the actual
work of laying tables, cleaning knives, lamps, etc., performed by the
under steward, so as to leave your major-domo free to superintend and
investigate the working of the whole establishment, down to the stable,
and report on it to his mistress; he should be taught to do this without
fear or prejudice, or any suspicion of sneaking or mischief-making:
obviously he cannot, with any show of dignity, rebuke the misdeeds of
the cook or orderly; if he has to wash plates and scrub out the pantry,
equally obviously he _must_ be honest and, as far as possible, superior
to bribery. Not being embarrassed with caste prejudices, he will
concern himself with the feeding and washing of the dogs, the care of
the poultry-yard, and our faithful head boy has, more than once, been
employed to shoot a hopelessly sick pony.

There is little more to add on the subject of the household staff. The
cook’s mate is but an embryo cook, who presently emerges from his modest
position and blossoms into a cook, with a satellite of his own. I believe
that, as a matter of fact, the cook’s mate does a fair share of the
cooking: this will be readily ascertained when the cook gets helplessly
drunk and dinner is forthcoming all the same!

The small house boys are equally budding stewards, and, if well looked
after, it is amazing how they sprout, physically and mentally, and how
soon they find out that a rise in pay is merited.

One word of advice to housekeepers, masculine and feminine—_don’t_ beat
the boys. There is still a prevailing idea that the master who wields the
_bulala_ (whip) with most vigour gets best served. But this I beg leave
to doubt. For the time being, fear may make them move faster and remember
longer, but there is, deeply implanted under every woolly, black scalp,
the sacred duty of reprisals, and the boy who is frequently flogged will
take it out somehow, sooner or later—be sure of that. Moreover, the
servant who really needs constant hitting is not worth keeping; and,
indeed, were he, through such a process, to be evolved into a perfect
treasure, he would be bought too dear, at the cost of so much irritation
and mental stress. For, it must be admitted, that for one occasion when a
boy really deserves a flogging he gets _bulala_ ten times, because Master
is feverish or worried, or ‘jumpy’; and poor Master seldom thinks, till
afterwards, of the spectacle he presents, pursuing a fleeing boy, and
vociferating—because he cannot find his shirt-stud. Alas, for ‘British
prestige’!

I was told, a short time ago, by one such master, whose naturally sweet
disposition had doubtless been tried by time and circumstances, that he
had had his boy severely flogged (‘six dozen’), _because the salt on his
dinner table was damp_. As a rule, a little mild sarcasm, or a ridiculous
nick-name bestowed is far more efficacious than a scolding, and if a
severe reminder is necessary, judicious fining has the greatest effect,
for the most sensitive bit of a house boy’s soul lives just underneath
his belt: when this is done, the culprit must _see_ the fine, in money,
thrown into the river, or placed in the kitchen fire, and know that it is
gone beyond recall, or else he merely credits you with making money out
of him, and is rather shocked at your meanness.

We want, do we not, to raise their standard, not to lower our own, and
though, of course, there are black sheep, many of them, I do believe that
good treatment evokes good service. The householder who, remembering how
comparatively new to the country the art of domestic service is, shows a
little consideration, never breaks a promise, and does not scold or whack
all round, because it happens to be a hot morning, will probably fare
best, after all; moreover, on returning from leave, he or she will be
sure to find ‘Audu’ or ‘Ibrahim’ smiling a welcome at Burutu, all anxious
to take up service again with such a desirable Master or ‘Missis.’




CHAPTER III

Dogs, Poultry and Cows


DOGS

This collection of notes, which aims at giving assistance to English men
and women in Nigeria, would, to my mind, fall miserably short of the mark
if it failed to include within its scope some practical suggestions for
the provision of comfort and the preservation of health of their dogs.

That West Africa is _not_ a healthy country for English dogs is only too
sadly certain, but it is equally certain that they will continue to come
as long as Englishmen do, therefore it is not worth while giving sage
advice as to the wisdom and true kindness of bringing or not bringing
them—especially as I like to try and be consistent, and I cannot picture
myself taking ship at Liverpool without one, or even two of my own!

I have met a variety of English dogs out here, from massive bull-terriers
down to the most fascinating little person, a tiny Yorkshire terrier;
but, to those who, coming out for the first time, are puzzled in the
selection of a dog, I would like to say:—let him be a young dog and a
small one. A puppy, well over distemper, aged from six to twelve months,
will suffer far less from the change of climate, food, etc., than an
older dog, and, when he does not weigh more than twenty or thirty pounds,
his lightness makes it a simple matter for him to be carried on the
march—for no dog should ever be allowed to run all through the hot hours
of a long march. We, who are a long way off the ground, on horseback,
occasionally grumble at the heat; what must be the sensations of the
faithful little follower padding wearily along, close to the baking
earth, all chance of breeze kept from him, as a rule, by high grass on
either side, and a pitiless sun scorching his spine all the time?

We learnt this lesson through sad experience, the loss of a dearly loved
little Irish terrier, who marched always on his own feet. He had lived
in perfect health for four years in India, and had even weathered eight
months in Sierra Leone, but died in Lokoja, after three months almost
continuous touring in the bush.

Since then our dogs have never been allowed to run; we have had two
carried all the way from Zungeru to Katāgum and back, a distance of eight
hundred miles. They very soon got accustomed to the confinement; one was
usually carried on the saddle of one of our mounted servants, and, after
a few days, he learnt to appreciate the arrangement and to jump up at
the pony, begging to be picked up as soon as the sun got hot. The other
dog, a bull-terrier, had an ordinary square provision box filled with
grass, its cover, a native-made wicker basket, having a small goat-skin
fastened just on the top to keep off the sun. The cover fitted loosely,
admitting plenty of air and was easily secured to the box by a few
strings. After the dog had run three or four miles in the fresh early
morning, and hunted and amused himself to his heart’s content, he was
usually very ready to pack himself into his box, especially as there were
invariably a few toothsome bones to be found there, and he then slept
peacefully in it, until his carrier dumped him down in camp.

The feeding of dogs is naturally a great factor in the preservation of
their health, and it will require supervision. The main difficulty is to
give them sufficient bulk of food without including too much meat; here,
we have no fresh potatoes, etc., and porridge becomes rather an expensive
article of dietary, as oatmeal costs a shilling for a small tin, which
disappears at once! I have been told that two large dogs required a
tin of oatmeal and a tin of army rations daily to feed them. I think
they must have become very bilious bull-terriers, and a serious item of
expense to their owner! We allow threepence a day per dog; this buys a
piece of meat and some bone, also a fair quantity of ‘gari’ (native
flour). The gari is well boiled with the meat, and appears looking like
a brownish sago pudding. The mixture is then flooded with milk and much
appreciated by the dogs. Every few days a little powdered sulphur is
mixed up with the feed, and is highly beneficial. Afterwards, they get
their bones, and the fare seems to suit them admirably. We always make a
point of giving our dogs, especially young puppies, weak tea if they will
drink it. In India I was told that it would prevent distemper altogether,
and, though I cannot vouch for the truth of this, it seems to be a
harmless little indulgence, and every mistress will, I expect, like to
see the little wistful faces asking ever so plainly for a saucer of tea.

Dogs are all the better for a dose of castor oil about once a week; it
improves their appearance and condition immensely, and it is a perfectly
simple matter administering it—when one knows how—so a short explanation
of the process may not be misplaced here. One person, kneeling down,
holds the dog’s body firmly between his knees to prevent him from
backing, and, putting his left forefinger gently into the corner of the
dog’s lips, pulls out his cheek, forming a sort of pocket into which the
oil is gently poured by another person, thus avoiding all forcing open of
the teeth and the consequent struggle and horrors of spilt oil. As a rule
the patient does not object in the least; the oil quietly filters through
his teeth, and down his throat; if he does not seem to be swallowing
it readily a little pressure on his nostrils closes them, and compels
him to open his throat. When a dog’s coat becomes ‘staring,’ his eyes
lustreless, and he appears generally spiritless and feverish, castor oil
is indicated, after which quinine must be given—five grains daily is
not too much—until he recovers. One of our dogs swallowed a tabloid of
quinine, wrapped in a slice of meat, every day, without detecting its
presence; but some are tiresome in this respect, and the only alternative
is to open their mouths and drop in a salt-spoonful of sulphate of
quinine. This they cannot get rid of except by swallowing it, and the
bitter taste is soon forgotten in the joy of a rewarding tit-bit of some
sort. We had a small fox-terrier who knew the very sight of the quinine
bottle, and bolted at once out of the room! The foregoing suggestions,
however, are intended only for occasions when the dog’s owner is quite
convinced that treatment of this kind is absolutely necessary; failing
that, I would most earnestly say, leave drugs alone, merely permit no
neglect, for, assuredly, a comfortable dog will be a healthy dog!

Another point of the utmost importance to a dog’s well-being and comfort,
is to keep him, as far as possible, free from fleas and ticks. Fleas, I
suppose, dogs _will_ have for all time, no matter how carefully they are
washed and brushed; the great enemy in Nigeria is the tick. During the
rains the grass swarms with them, and, as one cannot walk along a bush
path for a hundred yards without finding several of them on one’s skirts,
the number acquired by the dogs on a ten minutes’ hunt after a mouse or
a lizard can be well imagined. Each dog must be most carefully searched
and the pests removed at least twice a day, special care being taken to
inspect the inside of his ears, the little ‘pocket’ on them, between
his toes, and underneath his collar. There is none so wily as the dog
tick in choosing secluded nooks in which to suck his victim’s blood. The
inside of the dog’s ears should be smeared over with carbolic or sulphur
ointment applied with a feather; both are abhorrent to ticks, and it is
really a kindness to rub his whole body lightly with these ointments
or a very weak solution of creolin or ‘Jeyes’ Fluid.’ It will be found
that flies attack and bite dogs’ ears to a quite serious extent; I have
seen native dogs with their ears positively eaten away, but this can, of
course, be prevented by persistent care and perseverance. Carbolic or
sulphur ointment must be rubbed on thickly, daily, and at night-time, but
unless notice is taken of the very first few bites, it is most difficult
to effect a cure.


POULTRY

The keeping of poultry is certain to become, in the near future, a
feature of every English household in Nigeria, therefore the subject may
as well have its place in this chapter, though I do not, in the least,
feel qualified to offer any ‘counsels of perfection,’ as, so far, we have
been able to make only two efforts to introduce English fowls into this
country, and I must frankly confess that there are many difficulties in
the way of a complete success.

However, the class of fowl bred in the country is such a wretched one,
the birds are small, skinny and tasteless, and the eggs no larger than
bantams’, that the importation of good breeds is a very real necessity.
Here, as in other matters, the periodical leave to England after twelve
or eighteen months has prevented the rearing of chickens from being very
seriously undertaken, but I have a strong impression that if every one
will, at all events, ‘make a start,’ the good work will be carried on,
and it will not be long before the miserable ‘country fowl’ is a thing of
the past.

My personal experience on the subject of English fowls is as
follows:—Five years ago, we brought out four Black Minorca hens and one
cock; the latter died shortly after his arrival in Nigeria, but, on our
way up country, we had the good luck to be presented with a very fine
Plymouth Rock cock. The hens behaved beautifully; they travelled in a
large wicker basket, and regularly laid eggs in it during the daily
march. A fortnight later, alas! the Plymouth Rock died, and two hens
succumbed also, all dying from the same complaint, dysentery. After
six months, we brought our remaining two hens back to Lokoja, and they
survived for the rest of the tour, but they greatly deteriorated, both
in their appearance and in their laying, the eggs diminished in size and
lost their flavour.

On our return from leave, we brought a fresh consignment of fowls, and
if I call them ‘a mixed lot’ it is not intended altogether as a term of
disparagement, for we had purposely selected mixed breeds. A fine Buff
Orpington cock with a slight Black Minorca strain, two Black Minorca
hens, a handsome Houdan hen, and two highly indiscriminate ‘would-be’
Orpington hens made up the party. Further fortified by an incubator, a
kindly gift of Sir Alfred Jones, we fared forth to Bussa, firmly intent
on poultry rearing.

This time, our efforts were distinctly successful; in six months our
stock of six had increased to twenty-three, and had it not been for the
persistent and endless depredations of hawks, we should have reared a
far greater number. We found the Houdan an admirable and devoted mother,
and her progeny were our delight, so handsome were they, with a slight
Orpington strain added to their own beautiful spangles and jet-black
crest. Before a year was out all the original hens except one died, quite
suddenly and mysteriously, pointing to poisonous food or snake-bite;
but still, to-day, I am glad to think that we have distributed four
fine English cocks in different parts of the country, and have, at all
events, contributed our mite to the all-important task of improving the
food supply in this country. It is not in the least sublime to say that
empires are built on men’s stomachs, but, indeed, they form a surer
foundation than their gravestones to my un-soaring mind!

The incubator—owing to our peculiar circumstances—but to no fault of
its own, was not a great success. Our manner of living was, however,
exceptional, and did not give the incubator a ghost of a chance.
During the day the lamp could not be lighted at all, and in spite of
all ventilation, etc., the atmospheric heat in the room itself ran the
thermometer higher than it should be. Almost every night violent gusts
of wind, sweeping through the house, extinguished the lamp two or three
times, thoroughly chilling the eggs. Another difficulty was the obtaining
of really fresh eggs; the only successful hatchings I accomplished were
with guinea-fowls and eggs obtained from our own hens: but, as the
action of the incubator was so uncertain, we were reluctant to risk many
eggs, when the hens were ready and willing to sit. It was, however, a
great amusement and delight to us, and the hatching process was one
of absorbing interest—to our native friends it appeared a piece of
paralyzing Ju-ju—the newly born chick gracefully dropping from the tray
above to the softer floor below with a comical air of bewilderment and
surprise! Under more normal circumstances I am certain that incubators
(which can now be bought very cheap) would be of the greatest value in
chicken rearing out here: a ‘foster-mother’ or ‘breeder’ is _quite_
necessary to avoid the terrible infant mortality resulting from careless
mothers and prowling hawks.

Far the easiest and most paying is the rearing of ducks; they give no
trouble, and seem to require none of the coaxing and attention apparently
necessary for the hens; quite quietly they appear to make their own
arrangements, and in due time emerge with an eminently attractive and
satisfactory family of sixteen or thereabouts. Except for a tendency to
walk the babies off their legs, ducks are devoted and excellent mothers.

An extremely useful scrap of knowledge we have picked up, is, when the
hatch is due, or nearly so, to seize the opportunity, when the hen or
duck is off the nest, to immerse the eggs gently in hot water (105°);
almost immediately the ‘live’ eggs begin to roll about and dance in the
most exciting fashion, and those which, after a few minutes, make no
movement at all may be safely considered as ‘wrong’ and removed from
the hatch, as their presence is injurious to the hatching chicks, and
embarrassing to the mother.

I have found that the chief difficulty lies in finding enough _boiled_
food for the fowls; the victims of dysentery undoubtedly got the disease
from eating too much whole grain, but it is a grave problem to give them
enough of anything else. There is, at present, in this country, nothing
available to answer to the regular ‘chicken’s food’ mixture, provided
at home, consisting of boiled turnip cuttings, potato peelings, cabbage
leaves, sharps, etc. Perhaps when our vegetable gardens are on a firmer
basis we shall be able to lavish green food on our fowls; at present,
there are but boiled yams and sweet potatoes to be had, but the fowls do
not take kindly to them, nor to boiled rice, which, by the way, does not
agree with them. On the whole, I think they prefer boiled _gari_ to any
other cooked food; I have seen them enthusiastic over _aggidi_ (a native
food) mixed up with maize and a few odds and ends from the breakfast
table. Guinea-corn thus becomes their staple article of diet, and it
is only by giving them full liberty all day long, and allowing them to
procure their own grass and insect food, that the enemy, dysentery, is
avoided.

We were wrong, I suppose, in selecting Black Minorcas, from a sitting
point of view, as I believe that, even at home, they are non-sitters,
and they certainly are in Nigeria! However, with an incubator this is
a matter of no importance, and it would be difficult to find a more
satisfactory breed from a laying point of view. I should say, most
decidedly, that Dorkings or Plymouth Rocks would be found excellent
breeds to bring to this country, the latter being good sitters and a
hardy breed; but they must be kept free from damp, which is, I fancy,
the cause of their frequently contracting disease in the legs and feet.
I have also heard an authority on different sorts of poultry describe
Dorkings as ‘the very best breed for amateur poultry keepers,’ they are
excellent mothers, and quite the best kind for table purposes.

I cannot feel that I am able to give any very practical advice on this
subject; my own experience has been too limited to build a theory on, but
as the chicken, in one guise or another, is bound to appear so frequently
on our tables, it is more than advisable, it becomes a positive duty, to
endeavour to encourage all newcomers to help, by importing fowls from
England, to improve the Nigerian species. When next I come out I shall
certainly bring a collection of Dorkings and another incubator, for it
is worth remembering that the hen of the country is such a tiny creature
that she cannot possibly cover more than three or four good-sized eggs.

I also cherish golden dreams of bringing out English geese, as I believe
they would succeed, and repay, a hundred-fold, the trouble of bringing
them. Geese are less troublesome to feed than fowls, as they find so much
for themselves roaming about; they are also good sitters (I am speaking
of the white Embden geese), and, of course, a great delicacy for the
table. They should be brought out in the proportion of two geese to one
gander.

It is, perhaps, worth mentioning that bringing out live stock entails
little or no trouble; any large dealer will ship the birds in strong
coops with a supply of grain for the voyage, and their owner will find
them established on deck, and requiring nothing more than a daily visit,
and a little arrangement with the ship’s cook or butcher, as to their
cleanliness and a small supply of boiled food. These good folks are so
accustomed to the care of all kinds of live stock, domestic and wild,
being carried to and from West Africa, from a full-grown giraffe to tiny
gazelles, no larger than a rabbit, that they are invariably most ready
and willing to supervise anything of the sort.

All this considered, I am sure that every one will agree with me that it
is worth while giving a trial to imported live stock for the farm-yard;
my ambition even soars—in secret, and in fear and trembling—to the
importation of a few rabbits, for experimental purposes. I am aware
that the indiscriminate introduction of rabbits has caused unpopularity
elsewhere before now, but I should suggest their being kept in
confinement at first, and I should not think that the provision of green
food need be a difficulty, as they would almost certainly enjoy the
young leaves of Indian Corn, which can be grown anywhere. I will venture,
finally, to say, that, in my opinion, the humble bunny would prove a most
welcome addition to the Nigerian menu!


COWS

To mention the subject of dairy management may seem rather unnecessary,
and cause a smile when it is realized that cows cannot be persuaded to
live and flourish in Lokoja, or any of the southern districts of Nigeria,
and that for the most part one’s sole anxiety, as a dairy expert,
consists in the selection of sound tins of preserved milk! But, as the
joys of possessing one’s own cows, and obtaining a sufficiency of milk,
cream, and butter, can be realized by those whom kindly Fortune allows to
live in the Hausa States, far removed from the deadly Coast, and further
north still, it seems to me as well to set forth my own very small
experience in the matter.

My first step towards keeping cows—and that a veritable step in the
dark—was the selection of a churn. At this point, the eternal difficulty
of transport loomed into view as uncompromisingly as usual, and I decided
on a small tin, plunge churn. It consisted of a tin cylinder about
eighteen inches long, and four inches in diameter, with a cover, through
which passed a tin plunger, with flanges at the lower end. This churn
has the advantage of being very light and portable, and we found it a
complete success; it was perfectly easy to clean, and did its work most
rapidly, turning out a pound of butter in fifteen minutes.

The next necessary point is to possess _your own_ cows; the usual
plan of receiving a daily dole of a bottle full of milk, Heaven knows
how or where obtained, cannot be sufficiently condemned. Out of my
own experience I have known the simple Fulani cow-keeper to half fill
the basin before milking with extremely dirty water, and this I only
discovered by the merest accident. One would hardly expect to find such
up-to-date practices as ‘watering the milk’ in Nigeria, but it is done!

I know that milch cows are not at all easy to come by out here; the
Fulani, the only herdsman in the country, knows the value of his stock,
and will not sell, for there is a tremendous trade done in the markets in
sour milk and rancid butter.

I started with a stock of five cows, each with a small calf, and in full
milk: I then, with a lamentable want of foresight and proper humility,
decided on, and attempted to carry out all kinds of innovations and dairy
principles, such as separating the calves from the cows, endeavouring
to pacify the former with milk mixed with _dusa_ (bran)—which I could
never induce them to touch—and treating in a high-handed manner the
remonstrances of the _mai-sanu_ (cowman or head dairymaid). I may say at
once it was a dead failure; the cows went off their milk immediately,
and from all of them I did not get more than a quart twice daily, and
the mai-sanu ran away, appalled at my wicked violation of immemorial
customs! My courage, born of ignorance, ran into the soles of my shoes,
I obtained a new mai-sanu, and, bowing my head in chastened submission,
I resigned into his hands the whole outside arrangements of the ‘dairy,’
only stipulating that his hands should be scrupulously clean before
milking, and the udders wiped with a damp clean cloth—also that he should
produce a large basin full of milk morning and evening. This was done;
how and when the calves were tied or separated, I did not inquire. I
am quite sure that, one day, a more strong-minded and conscientious
fellow-country-woman will know all about it, and reform things
magnificently; meantime—cleanliness and purity assured—I was content to
leave ‘pretty well’ alone, and let the mai-sanu make his own arrangements.

The cows of Northern Nigeria are splendid animals, of great size, with
enormous branching horns, but their udders are very small, and English
dairy folks would doubtless smile at the idea of extracting milk at
the rate of one quart only, daily, per cow! But so it was, and when
due allowance is made for inferior grazing and the dry season, perhaps
it was not so astonishing. At any rate, the supply proved ample for
our requirements, so I felt it would be both ungracious and foolish to
grumble. I found the milk very rich and delicious, and from the special
pan set aside each evening for cream to set, a good pint and a half of
thick cream was forthcoming the next morning, yielding roughly a pound of
excellent butter. There was always cream for the porridge at breakfast,
plenty for puddings and mayonnaises, and even for cream cheeses, which I
made every few days.

[Illustration: OUR ENERGETIC D.S.C. (CAPTAIN BURNSIDE) TRAINING BULLOCKS.
(p. 236)]

[Illustration: GIANT SUNFLOWERS AT BUSSA. (p. 243)]

We marched our cows down country from Katāgum on our return, and they
gave us a capital supply of milk on the road; but, once established in
Lokoja, they fell off in appearance and milk. The calves sickened and
died, as well as the cows, and, much to our sorrow, we had to recognize
that, obviously, the only thing to do was to dispose of the remainder,
alas! to become tough beef in the market. It was, I suppose, inevitable,
owing to the total change of diet to green, luxurious grass, which the
cows devoured eagerly, to their own undoing; but I parted very sadly from
my philanthropic dream of providing the English community in Lokoja with
a regular supply of fresh milk, etc. It was a plan I had very much at
heart, and I have not altogether forsaken it, but I quite recognize that
it cannot be done with the Hausa cow.

It is a matter for great regret, this difficulty of keeping cows alive
in Lokoja; many a ‘bad case’ in hospital longs for fresh milk—as
unobtainable, unfortunately, as ripe strawberries or blocks of ice.

Possibly, one fine, _very_ fine day, when, in our wisdom, we remove our
cantonment to the breezy heights of the Patti plateau (six hundred feet
above, and perfectly accessible), all these good things may be ours.
Meantime, unless you are going to the Hausa States, and away north, the
only dairy equipment you will need to bring is—a tin-opener!




CHAPTER IV

The Garden


I remember that my opinion of the possibilities of gardening successfully
in Northern Nigeria expressed itself in three stages: first, on arrival,
with joyful confidence: ‘I am certain _anything_ will grow out here!’
Secondly, after six months, in despair: ‘_Nothing_ will grow out here!’
Thirdly, after a year, with renewed but chastened cheerfulness: ‘_Some_
things will do all right!’

The subject was more or less unexplored ground when I arrived in the
country five years ago; I could get little or no gardening information,
except that one or two enterprising spirits had tried—and failed. Perhaps
the chief reason for this was that the amount of work to be got through
in each day makes it practically impossible for any Government official
to give the personal attention absolutely necessary to the making of a
garden.

The country produces no native gardeners, similar to the _mali_ of India;
the utmost one can extract from the local artist is that he will scratch
up weeds and grass, and faithfully water everything daily in the dry
season. The tour of service of from twelve to eighteen months, followed
by leave home and an uncertain prospect of returning to the same station,
has, I suppose, prevented any attempt at all being made in the majority
of cases, and the very few spots that have been started as gardens seem
to have flourished until their owners left, when they were utterly
neglected, the bush claimed its own, and all traces of cultivation
vanished far quicker than they had appeared.

But now that things are progressing generally in Nigeria, life conditions
improving somewhat, and each station containing a larger number of white
men, willing to carry on each others’ labours in this line, the gardening
problem comes nearer solution, though I fancy that, for all time, it will
need a stout heart and endless perseverance.


THE FLOWER GARDEN

The first ‘don’t’ that occurs to me under this heading is on the subject
of English out-door flowers. One’s natural instinct is to try and
surround oneself with the old favourites, sweet-peas, mignonette, poppies
and pinks, but the attempt, I fear, is sheer waste of time and trouble;
hardly any will come to maturity and blossom in the verandah; they will
grow up cheerfully to a certain point, then wither off, and transplanting
seedlings in the open is out of the question, unless permanent shade can
be given.

I think I can claim to have given them a fair trial—I brought out the
usual ‘collection’ from England, made experimental sowings in boxes on
the verandah, nursed and watched them tenderly, but I got no results in
the blossom line except from the convolvulus. I then tried a collection
from a French firm, and from these seeds, I succeeded in coaxing
blossoms, from zinnias, marigolds, nasturtiums, balsams and petunias—the
rest were a complete failure.

My third experiment was with acclimatized seeds from India, and these
gave far the best results. The first success was a splendid bed of
portulacca, blazing with crimson, white, mauve and gold, rejoicing in the
sun which shrivelled everything else. I should like every one to make a
point of raising this beautiful little flower, for it is easily grown,
and gives a real reward for very little trouble. It should be sown at the
end of the rains, in boxes on the verandah, sheltered until the little
plants look sturdy and fleshy, then planted out in bed or border, and
shaded from the sun for a day or two, until growth is started, the plants
will then begin to spread and blossom into a carpet of glowing colour.

Balsams, marigolds, sunflowers, vinca and zinnias will do well sown out
in the open, under moderate shade, especially the last-named; the finest
zinnias I have ever seen were a bunch presented to me out of a bachelor’s
little garden at Zaria. Sunflowers attain an immense height and blossom
magnificently; I had huge plants, almost trees, at Bussa, fourteen and
sixteen feet high, bearing masses of flowers. Balsams I have always been
a little contemptuous over, but the best double kinds are well worth
while cultivating. A special packet from Sutton, called, I think, ‘Rose,’
gave splendid results, thick clusters of delicate rosy pink blossoms,
resembling pink carnations or rosettes of chiffon, flowered in one bed
continuously from July to December, and established themselves on the
firmest basis in my affections. All varieties of convolvulus can be sown
outside, and will climb and twine and riot delightfully everywhere,
clothing hideous walls and bare fences. In Lokoja I have taken great
pains to cultivate freely that most charming creeper, the sapphire blue
Clitoria, a climbing pea of the greatest beauty, and a free grower,
bringing, in the first instance, _twenty seeds_ from Government House in
Sierra Leone! It has rewarded my efforts so well that now no one need
want for quantities of seed; there is also a white variety which is just
as beautiful and satisfactory. Cannas flourish, and make capital patches
of colour, the finer kinds, some of which are very gorgeous, doing just
as well as the ordinary scarlet sort, which grows all over the country,
and from the seeds of which Mahomedan rosaries are made. Phloxes,
nasturtiums and asters can be induced to flower with a good deal of
preliminary care and watering; but those who, not unnaturally, desire
to achieve the maximum result with the minimum effort, will do well to
concentrate their endeavours on zinnias and sunflowers, especially the
single Japanese sunflowers, as they are eminently decorative. Vinca is a
flower which might be dubbed uninteresting, but it has a special virtue,
that of blossoming practically all the year round, and being available,
when everything else is shrivelled and dead, in the dryest season.

Another public benefactor is salpiglossis, an exquisite plant with
velvety glowing flowers of all shades—no well-regulated Nigerian garden
should be without it.

To my mind the wild flowers of the country are by no means to be despised
in the garden, many are really extremely beautiful; all are indigenous to
the soil and therefore no trouble to grow, and I believe that the main
reason that they are not more frequently seen in gardens is that the
gardeners have never had the opportunity of noticing them in the ‘bush.’

There is a splendid coreopsis with golden daisy-like blossoms some three
or four inches in diameter, the seed of which I gathered on the march a
year ago, and subsequently sowed in large round beds. The result was a
perfectly glorious blaze of brilliant yellow blossoms for weeks together,
when the rains had finished. Terrestrial orchids in their mauve, purple,
yellow and green beauty would be exquisite dotting the grass, as would
the crimson and white striped lilies, fragile babianas, and the lesser
gloriosa, which is not a creeper. A tiny scarlet salvia has often
appealed to me and the little plant, _Striga Senegalensis_, would form a
carpet of deep cool mauve, delightful to see.


THE LAWN

It is said to be very dear to the heart of every Englishman to own a
lawn, and it certainly should be doubly so to John Bull in exile; in a
tropical country well-kept turf is much to be desired, there is nothing
so cool and refreshing to tired eyes dazzled with the glare of sunshine
and baked earth, and, perhaps, nothing that gives such a home-like and
cared-for look to a West African compound. This demesne is usually
reclaimed bush, which in nature grows rank, reed-like, coarse grass, and
the ground destined for a lawn must be thoroughly and deeply _dug up_. It
is worse than useless to attempt to remove it by merely pulling up the
grass. After digging and turning, all the roots must be picked out most
carefully, for it is indeed heartbreaking to see the enemy reappearing
all over your infant lawn.

If the fine short grass, called in India ‘dhoob’ grass, can be found
in the neighbourhood, and it usually can be, especially along the
edges of roads, it should be brought in quantities (with its roots),
planted closely in tiny bunches all over the prepared ground, watered
daily, patted down to encourage spreading, and your lawn will be fairly
started. Another method is to chop up the grass in lengths of about four
inches, mix it with good soil and water, and spread the mixture all over
the lawn, but, on the whole, I think the planting will be found most
satisfactory. If ‘dhoob’ grass is not to be had, English grass seed must
be sown, but this is an experiment I have never had occasion to make. I
have seen what is called Bahama grass grown with great success in Sierra
Leone, and fashioned into lovely velvety croquet lawns.


TREES AND SHRUBS

The planting of useful and ornamental trees is no less than a positive
duty incumbent on every householder in West Africa; they are infinitely
less trouble, and give far more lasting satisfaction than flower growing;
besides, even in this most selfish of all selfish countries, it behoves
us all to think of those who will come after us, and not neglect to plant
a mango stone because we ourselves may scarcely hope to gather fruit from
the tree that will result. I do not think I am exaggerating when I say
that I suppose that every flowering tree and shrub in Lokoja, and many
in Zungeru, owes its existence to the wise labours of those ‘old hands’
who, years ago, planted out the ground around the old Preparanda with
trees, from which innumerable cuttings have been obtained; at all events,
I have never forgotten to feel grateful to them.

Orange and lime trees grow readily from pips, mangoes and date palms from
stones, pineapples can be raised from the leafy crowns on the fruit,
paw-paws spring up wherever the seeds are scattered, but they, like
bananas, are not ornamental, and should be relegated to the back garden.

During the rainy season slips of flowering trees and shrubs never
fail to strike; ‘frangipani’ with rosy blossoms and delicious scent,
_Poinciana Regia_, better known as ‘flamboyant’ on account of its regal
scarlet flowers, three kinds of acacias, red, yellow and white, fragrant
rose-coloured oleanders, and many others, can be put in wherever your
fancy dictates, and will certainly reward your patience—usually by
endeavouring to flower before putting out a single leaf!

There is a delightful, sweet-scented golden allamanda, growing in sturdy
bushes, and forming an ideal hedge, as it is loaded with blossom for
more than half the year. Another somewhat similar flower is _Thevetia_,
which sows itself pertinaciously from its poisonous seeds, and
_Tabernaemontana_ is another most decorative shrubby plant, with shining
dark foliage, and a flower resembling a gardenia.

Nigeria abounds in indigenous blossoming trees and creepers, all
beautiful, and mostly sweet-scented, from the gorgeous _Spathodea
Nilotica_, _Erythrina_ and _Kigelia Africana_ downwards; indeed, no one
who travels about with open eyes can fail to acquire enough seeds, pods
and stones to plant acres with beauty and fragrance; day after day, on
the march, I have filled my pockets.

The bush, too, is full of flowers well worth cultivating, as I have
before remarked. There are creepers and climbing plants innumerable,
including _Mussaenda elegans_, bearing handsome flame-coloured blossoms,
crimson _Caconia paniculata_, Strophanthus with its fantastic, trailing
creamy petals, delicate asparagus fern, and _Landolphia owariensis_
(the rubber vine), queen of climbers, a sheet of snow-white, intensely
fragrant flowers. And if Landolphia is the queen of climbers, surely the
king is a gorgeous apricot-hued _Gloriosa Superba_, which fastens its
delicate persistent tendrils round every available support, and when the
flowering season is over is beautiful still with bursting pods full of
scarlet seeds. In the forest, beside the river one finds clerodendron,
bryophyllum, quisqualis, and a thousand others; indeed, I only wish I had
enough botanical knowledge to name half the native flowers and trees I
have raised from seed collected casually on the march.


THE VERANDAH GARDEN

Perhaps the verandah garden is one’s dearest and closest interest; wise
people may shake their heads, and mutter about the number of mosquitoes
attracted by the watering of ferns and flowers, but, after all, when
there are at least two millions of mosquitoes about, a thousand more or
less makes very little difference, and I am certain no Englishwoman in
Africa will forgo her verandah garden for so trifling a reason!

I have had orchids and ferns, all varieties of so-called crotons, for
they are really codeums, hundreds of sturdy little orange trees, raised
from pips collected at the luncheon table, cannas and caladiums, and
tubs of the invaluable aromatic-scented occimum viride, whose virtues
saved us endless annoyance from mosquitoes. Here a few English flowers
blossomed, one tiny rose bush, petunias, balsams, Japanese sunflowers,
etc., creepers of all kinds flourished, sky-blue, rose-coloured and
yellow convolvuli climbing and clasping the verandah posts, sapphire
blue clitoria twisting and twining in beautiful confusion, mingled with
a brilliant scarlet convolvulus-like climber, while tiny, starry _Ipomea
quamoclit_, crimson and white, wound slender feathery arms round every
available twig and stem.

The bath-water must be kept every morning to water the verandah garden,
the soapiness and especially the suspicion of Scrubbs ammonia, if that
is used, are most beneficial, and by doing the watering yourself you
can ensure a due proportion and see that ferns are not starved while
seedlings are drowned.

I have always longed to have _real_ roses in my verandah garden, but I
fear they would but add one more to the long list of disappointments.
Though they do well in Southern Nigeria, I have so far seen only one rose
tree here at Zungeru; it was growing an immense height, full of green
leaves and long stalks, an infallible sign that the general temperature
is too high, and its blossoms have been few and poor. Still, I believe
with much care and pruning the more delicate kinds might succeed; I hope
to try one day. Last year I devoted my energies to the cultivation of
geraniums and pelargoniums, which were only a partial success, but were
handicapped by being carried about the country. I also experimented with
tuberoses, which were an immense success, growing freely as if they
really liked the soil and temperature. I _have_ great hopes that the more
delicate bulbous plants _will_ flourish in Nigeria during the rains,
therefore I have included a few of them in the list at the end of this
chapter.


THE VEGETABLE GARDEN

It seems to me a matter for the gravest regret that the culture of
vegetables is not more seriously undertaken in this country where fresh
vegetables are so essential to health, and such a priceless addition to
the daily menu of tough and tasteless meat. To any one who has lived in
the tiniest Indian station, and seen the Government garden supplying each
household with an enormous basket of vegetables for the noble sum of
1_s._ 6_d._ per month, it seems as incredible as it is almost criminal
that West Africa is not as well catered for; it _could_ be done, as
many private gardens in the country have amply proved, but—it is _not_
done! To quote Major Ronald Ross:—‘Government sometimes maintains, at
considerable cost, botanical gardens for various economical purposes. I
was told that these gardens used to grow vegetables for the Europeans,
until stopped by a mandate from England, on the ground that a Government
botanist is not a market gardener!’ Comment is quite needless, but there
is some comfort in reflecting that if we cannot all soar to the giddy
eminence of a ‘Government botanist’ we may yet emulate, more or less, the
humble market gardener, and to this end I am offering my small experience
in this line.

[Illustration: OUR GARDENER AT PLAY. (p. 250)]

[Illustration: ‘JEWEL’ AND ‘BROWN MOUSE.’ (p. 258)]

Growing vegetables is, to my mind, the most satisfactory part of garden
work in West Africa; the percentage of failures is certainly smaller, and
the results so entirely to be desired. But, like the rest of your garden,
it will have to be _made_ before you can set to work to grow vegetables.
Divide the ground into beds as long as space will allow, and not more
than three feet wide, with paths between. Every bed must have a roof or
shelter, consisting of matting or palm branches, fastened to uprights
four or five feet high, and the earth must be well banked up so as to be
quite a foot above the ground level.

Vegetables do best when sown in September, when the heaviest rains are
over, though a few kinds can be sown even in the dry season with some
success if care and regular watering are given to them; I have sown
vegetables in May, August and December, always with satisfactory results,
my object being to secure fresh vegetables nearly all the year round.

The most important factor in the success of the vegetable garden (and,
indeed, amongst the flowers too) is that the seed should be quite fresh
from England. A small quantity arriving twice a year will give far better
results than one of the large ‘collections’ which, moreover, invariably
contain many items that are quite useless in this country. I had a huge
tin of vegetable seeds given me last year—a precious prize—only to find,
to my dismay, that it consisted mainly of strawberries and peas! I have
heard of English peas being grown and eaten in the Bornu country; my own
experience has been that they grow most hopefully until they are about
two feet high, they then begin to wither off and disappear.

Tomatoes will be found to succeed admirably; if they are inclined to
grow too luxuriantly and to run to leaf rather than to fruit, this can
be checked by cutting off half the leaves and snipping away many of the
flowers. I have never seen better tomatoes than those grown in Nigeria.

French beans and scarlet runners are most successful; the young plants of
the latter shoot up in the most amazing ‘Jack and the Beanstalk’ fashion,
and the dwarf beans are quite loaded with beans six weeks after sowing.

Cucumbers give excellent results, also vegetable marrows. These should
be sown in boxes on the verandah, and planted out when they attain the
dignity of four leaves. Let them be planted close to the uprights so that
they can commence climbing at once instead of sprawling along the ground.
I found it quite a good plan at Bussa to plant these vegetables out
beside a low clay wall, and, after assisting them to reach the top, to
leave them to their own devices; it was always an amusement to hunt for
and happen upon unexpected ripe cucumbers!

Lettuces, radishes and cress may all be relied upon, also spinach (the
native sort) and carrots; kohl rabi, the turnip-rooted cabbage, is a most
excellent and useful vegetable eaten quite young; we found it one of our
best crops, and beyond the thinning out required no attention at all. My
beet-root, cabbages, Brussels sprouts and rhubarb all failed, but that
I strongly suspect was in some degree due to the incursions of greedy
fowls. In this connexion, I may mention that a low close railing, made
even of guinea-corn stalks, is most useful to fence in each bed if there
is a farm-yard loose in the compound.

English potatoes have been grown at Zungeru, I believe, but rather as
an interesting experiment than as an article of diet. Onions are so
extensively grown by the natives that they are hardly required in the
garden, except the tiny spring onions for use in a salad.

I do not think it is widely enough known that, when English vegetables
are ‘out’ the native bean (_wake_) if gathered very, very young, is
practically indistinguishable from French beans, and a tuber (_tumuku_)
in appearance and taste closely resembles new potatoes; both plants
grow like weeds and are immensely prolific; I have seen fifty pounds of
tumukus gathered from _seven plants_!

I should say, from my study of the climatic effect on plants generally,
that hardly any of the really hardy English vegetables would ever reward
one for the trouble of growing them in Nigeria, such as cauliflower,
turnips, etc. Sea kale might do well, and such a delicacy would be well
worth striving after. A valiant effort has been made to grow mushrooms
from imported spawn, but the process entailed a good deal of rather
elaborate arrangement, and the result was nil. But I see no reason why
they should not be cultivated in grass; I have eaten quite delicious tiny
mushrooms which I gathered myself on the polo-ground at Lokoja. It seems
to me that if a crisp fresh salad and cucumber can be produced daily,
with a dish of tomatoes and another of French beans, one may well be
grateful for small mercies, and concentrate attention on growing these,
experimenting meanwhile with everything and anything that comes to hand.

I am specially anxious to see the Avocada pear grown freely in Northern
Nigeria; it flourishes on the coast, and a more delicious fruit could
hardly be desired. I raised four strong little trees in Lokoja, which,
alas, went the way of all things in my absence, and I believe there are a
few at Zungeru. It is a very easy matter to bring a quantity of the large
seeds from Sierra Leone, or from off the ship, where they usually appear
at table.

In conclusion, I am appending a list of flower and vegetable seeds which
I hope will find their way into every one’s baggage, for they will,
according to my small experience, reward the amateur gardener best; also
a few of the flowering shrubs and creepers which ought to have a place in
the garden, and which would, I feel sure, flourish in Nigeria.


FLOWER SEEDS

    Convolvulus, of all kinds.
    Zinnias.
    Sunflowers.
    Portulacca.
    Marigolds.
    Balsams.
    Phlox.
    Vinca.
    Petunias.
    Cannas.
    Dahlias.
    Sweet-scented Tobacco.
    Cinerarias.
    Aquilegia.
    Heliotrope.
    Asters.
    Coleus.
    Pelargoniums.
    Carnations.
    Nasturtiums.
    Sweet Sultans.
    Gaillardias.
    Salpiglossis.
    Geraniums.

It will be observed that many familiar garden flowers are omitted from
this list; this is not an oversight, simply—they will not thrive. I am,
moreover, drawing on my own limited experience only, and that not merely
of successes, but also of failures and disappointments.


BULBS, ETC.

    Tuberoses.
    Achimenes.
    Eucharis, and various hot-house lilies.
    Freesia.
    Agapanthus.
    Monbretia.
    Ixia.
    Amaryllis.


FLOWERING SHRUBS, CLIMBERS, ETC.

    Poinsettias.
    Hibiscus.
    Stephanotis.
    Tacsonia, and other Passion flowers.
    Lapageria.
    Roses
      Princess Alice of Monaco.
      Comtesse Riza du Parc.
      Ma Surprise.
      Comtesse d’Auerstadt.


VEGETABLES

    French Beans.
    Scarlet Runners.
    Broad Beans.
    Cucumbers.
    Melons.
    Sea Kale.
    Spinach.
    Egg Plant.
    Tomatoes.
    Cress.
    Lettuces.
    Radishes.
    Marrows.
    Carrots.
    Parsley.
    Spring Onions.




CHAPTER V

The Stable


My feminine readers may feel inclined to ‘skip’ this chapter with the
remark: ‘Well, the stables are not in my department’; but I think the
wife of an official in Nigeria will usually find that her husband has
more work of his own to do than he can well squeeze into each day,
and, however slight her previous knowledge on the subject may be, the
certainty that, unless she bestirs herself and gives personal attention
and supervision, the ponies will be neglected, ill-fed and uncleanly,
will, I feel sure, be sufficient stimulus to any true Englishwoman.
For she naturally loves horses, and cannot but be fond of her wiry
little thirteen-hand ponies in Nigeria; because they are, as a rule,
sweet-tempered, willing, honest little souls, whose mistress will, in
almost every case, have reason to remember how gallantly they carried her
on such and such a march, and how cleverly they climbed and negotiated
the nasty places, and forded uncertain-looking rivers. This alone will
give them a strong claim on her loving care, and she will admit, after
a time at all events, that it is worth while to learn all she can on
the subject, and to spend half an hour every morning at the stables,
inspecting each pony and his house, and another half-hour after the
evening ride to see them dried, rubbed down and fed. For ourselves, I
hardly think we could sleep in peace unless we had paid our usual visit
to the stables to satisfy ourselves that all was well there, the ponies
comfortable and well supplied with grass.

The morning visit may well be spent in what would appear to the new-comer
to be childish reiteration of most elementary instruction to the man who
makes a profession of looking after your horse. For instance, it is quite
necessary to demand to be shown the inside of your ponies’ feet every
day: your horse-boy—until trained—takes no personal interest in them,
and assuredly will not clean them out on his own initiative, so, without
your daily examination, a tiresome attack of thrush may lay your pony up
for weeks or months, or a painful little stone, picked up perhaps in the
last canter home, may remain there all night to his great discomfort.
At present the ponies are not shod in this country, and though we may
advance to metalled roads I hope for the sake of their owners and
themselves they will never require it, for I can see heavy additional
trials in store for them both, when the shoeing art is imperfectly
learned and slovenly applied.

Each horse has his own attendant, but the grass-cutter of India is
not kept, as the grass is so near and in such quantities that it can
usually be cut from one’s own compound, or at least from a few yards
off. Here the watchful eye is necessary; the ‘_doki_ (horse) boy’ (who,
as a rule, is a combination of utter incapacity, laziness and complete
ignorance) likes immensely to be left at home when you go for a ride. He
will then cut a bundle of the coarsest and wettest marsh grass he can
find—naturally—as ten minutes’ work will produce a bigger bundle than
half an hour’s cutting of the fine, short grass which is so infinitely
better. He will then squat down on the ground and engage in a process
that is absolutely blood-curdling to the unaccustomed onlooker; the grass
is taken in small bundles, grasped by his left hand, while his right foot
is firmly planted on the ends of the stalks; he then chops up the grass,
a most murderous-looking weapon falling rapidly, and without, apparently,
any special aim, within half an inch of his foot at each blow. I used
to feel quite sick with apprehension, and even now I always expect to
see five brown toes fly up into the air! The doki-boy forthwith conveys
this mass of wet stuff into the pony’s stable for his consumption during
the night, thus forming a sound basis for colic in the morning. _Don’t
let him do it._ Even if dhoob grass is not to be had, make him cut the
grass before midday, and have it well spread out in the sun, so that the
pony gets it thoroughly dried. Remember, he does not want real _food_
at night, only something comforting to munch, that will employ his mind
harmlessly and happily, and divert his attention from trying to break
loose and go off to fight any other pony he can find near at hand.

The main horse food out here is guinea-corn simply shredded off the
large stalk, the little stems being left, to ensure the pony eating
slowly, and thus digesting his meal. It is not easy to lay down a rule
for quantity, as ponies vary, and the size of stalks of guinea-corn also
varies; the best thing for the pony’s owner to do is to ask the advice
of the neighbour who appears to have the best-kept ponies, or, if there
are no neighbours, let him or her ask the ponies themselves by watching
them feed. It soon becomes easy to determine whether they are getting
enough; that is the main point, for I believe that a pony can scarcely
be over-fed in this country. Try them with twelve large stalks of
guinea-corn for each feed, i.e. about half a bundle per day to each pony.
The guinea-corn is sold in bundles, varying a little in size and price,
according to whether the district is a corn country or not; as a rule a
fair-sized bundle costs, roughly, a shilling.

On tour, in places where guinea-corn was not to be had, and the ponies
doing hard work, we have given them crushed Indian corn (maize); they
liked it and throve on it. _Dusa_ (bran) should invariably be mixed with
the feeds, be they of maize or guinea-corn, three large handfuls to each
feed; the ponies are fond of it, nothing is better for them, and it can
always be obtained easily. The majority, too, will drink far more readily
and copiously if a handful of dusa is stirred into the water.

Country potash (_konwa_) is a daily article of diet with the Nigerian
pony. He has it, a piece about the size of a walnut, thoroughly dissolved
in his water, and he thinks so much of it that often he will not drink
without it. N.B.—Keep the konwa yourself and give it out every day, for
it is also an article of diet for the doki-boy!

I expect the ponies would much enjoy lucerne if the garden could be made
to produce it, but I am sorrowfully compelled to admit that after growing
a crop of carrots with infinite care, and triumphantly bearing them off
to the stables as a wonderful treat, the ungrateful ponies spit them out
contemptuously and would have none of them!

The stables themselves must be rather a shock to an English mind:
they are just circular huts—one for each pony—either with mud walls
and a conical thatched roof, or else with walls of grass matting. Mud
walls have the advantage of windows, which give a breeze, but bring
possibilities of flies and wasps at the same time. Doors are usually
wanting; the pony is picketed by one of his feet to a wooden post about
two feet high, round which he can circle by means of a ring upon it. The
post is driven into the ground in the middle of his stable. The ponies
are quite accustomed to this method; they have their heads free, and
they can lie down or walk around as they feel inclined. We always prefer
the plan of fixing three bars firmly in the doorway, dispensing with the
picketing arrangement, and thus giving the ponies the luxury of a loose
box. The stable floor is of ordinary hardened mud, and should be freshly
sanded every day. Bedding is not required.

A few words as to the doki-boy. He is lazy, and utterly ignorant of his
job, usually downright frightened of his pony, and at every whisk of
the latter’s tail, will make agonized appeals to his better feelings,
uttering apprehensive clucks the while. Still, even the raw material,
if he is docile and willing, is quite teachable, and he is, I think,
invariably kind to his pony. His sins are mostly those of omission.

You will have to begin from the very beginning in your education of him,
and see all his work, for your own sake and the pony’s. For instance,
I remember one evening, when a pony came in much heated after polo,
we stood by while our horse-boy, quite our best and most intelligent,
proceeded to rub him down as usual, after which, to our horror, he shook
out a clean rubber and began to fan the sweating pony with it! This, on a
distinctly chilly evening after sunset!

[Illustration: MR LAFONE’S ‘WHITE MOUSE.’ (p. 261)]

[Illustration: RIDING ASTRIDE—A LOCALLY MADE SKIRT! (p. 265)]

Hand-rubbing is quite unknown, and will be most unwillingly adopted, but
it is worth any amount of tiresome teaching and repetition of the same
order; there is absolutely nothing that will so quickly improve the looks
and condition of ponies. We have them tethered close to the verandah each
morning and afternoon, and superintend the hand-rubbing ourselves, no
pony’s toilet being considered complete till his doki-boy is himself in
a healthy perspiration. The ponies, too, enjoy the process, especially
if they are rewarded for steadiness and patience by many pieces of juicy
sugar-cane, which, by the way, is most useful for fattening up a thin
pony, as well as being a handy little delicacy to carry on one’s visits
to the stables. It should be peeled and cut in small pieces three inches
long.

The new doki-boy, too, has no idea how to put on a saddle and bridle,
and for many days I fear you will have to take them off, as every strap
will be united to the wrong buckle, and put them on yourself before him,
which usually ends in broken nails, dirty hands, much heat and a lost
temper. But never trust the doki-boy’s powers until you are quite sure
of them, as it is really dangerous to life and limb; you can hardly
imagine how many subtle ways he can invent of putting on a bridle the
wrong way. He also prefers to drag it off without undoing the curb-chain
or throat-lash, a most reprehensible piece of laziness that has to
answer for many a docile pony showing temper and refusing to be bridled
without an unpleasant struggle. It is an excellent thing to cultivate
an unforgettable habit of loosening girths, curb-chain and throat-lash
oneself on dismounting.

One word more of warning: water must _not_ be given after food. It
seems an absurdly superfluous caution, but I can assure you it has been
done, is done to-day, and will be done as long as the pony’s welfare
is not cared for personally by his owner. It is, as every one knows,
most dangerous, on account of colic and indigestion, and may frequently
account for the ingenuous statement of the doki-boy that ‘Allah has given
the doki a pain in his stomach!’ Water should be given quite half an hour
before the corn, the latter being well spread out on the ground to ensure
slow feeding and thorough digestion.

Saddlery must, of course, be brought out from England, and should be
selected with the greatest care; all metal work must be non-rusting, and
head-stalls and girths chosen to fit ponies from thirteen to fourteen
hands. I have found it a very satisfactory plan to adopt the Richards’
numdah (I believe the patent is called the ‘Wykeham’); the saddle itself
has no stuffing and fits on to the numdah, which, being specially soft,
adapts itself to the shape of the pony, and thus avoids the only too
frequent cause of a sore back or wither. It is about three inches in
thickness and, having absorbed all the perspiration, can be easily dried
in the sun, the under surface being well beaten and brushed to prevent
it from getting hard or caked. I have ridden over two thousand miles on
one of these numdahs, and I will venture to say that it is practically
impossible to give a pony a sore back. It can be imagined what a blessing
that is on the march, when it is so difficult to lay him up for a few
days even; besides, all the bother of continually re-stuffing a saddle
is done away with. Any saddle can be fitted with a ‘Wykeham’ numdah by
Messrs. Richards, at Winchester, for a guinea.

When choosing a saddle, take care to select one (with a cut-back tree, of
course) that is not longer than necessary; the Nigerian ponies are much
shorter in the barrel than English horses, and are apt to get their backs
rubbed with a long saddle.

As the result of my own experience, I _most_ strongly advise every
woman who intends to do much riding out here, especially in the way of
marching, to abandon her side-saddle altogether, and adopt the ‘astride’
position. In the first place, it is far more comfortable and less tiring
on a long march; secondly, it does away with the necessity of bringing
out special saddlery for oneself, it makes one quite independent of
being ‘put up,’ and also enables one to march in the most comfortable of
clothes, a short divided skirt or bloomers, putties and shooting boots;
thirdly, and most important of all, it is the greatest blessing to the
pony. No matter how straight you sit, sooner or later the strain of a
side-saddle begins to tell on a pony, from the mere fact that the weight
of the rider’s two legs is on one side of him! I noticed this especially
at Katāgum when riding horses which had never carried a side-saddle
before, and so sensitive were they to the innovation that it was almost
impossible to keep them in the road at all—they bored so badly to the
near side.

Bring out also picketing gear; it is much more durable than country
rope, and does not rub the hair off the ponies’ feet. It consists of a
stout iron ring, with a short chain, attached to a wide padded leather
bracelet, buckling round the pony’s fetlock. You will have to teach
the horse-boys how to clean saddlery; I think there is nothing better
than beeswax and soft soap, but saddle soap can usually be bought. The
mai-doki’s incorrigible laziness comes out here; unless frequently
watched and stood over, he confines himself to giving the seat of one’s
saddle a polish like a mirror, and never touches one of the out-of-sight
straps and parts, which need far the most care and softening. Bits must
be well dried and wiped directly they are taken out of the pony’s mouth,
and the whole of the saddlery should be kept _in the house_. A saddle
stand is easily made by any native carpenter, and is by no means an
eyesore in the verandah, if the saddles are well polished and the bridles
shining.

Only on one occasion on the march I lost sight of my saddle, which was
carried off to the doki-boys’ quarters, and to what use it was put I
cannot fathom; I only know that, the next morning, it appeared with the
seat deeply scratched and scored, and looking five years older! The
African servant is utterly devoid of respect for valuable belongings; he
possesses nothing himself that is worth taking care of, and he listens
with polite but bored submission while you very forcibly point out his
crimes of destruction, but he is obviously indifferent, really, to the
damage done, and thinks it all rather a silly fuss. ‘Is not a saddle
still a saddle even if it is hideously scratched and ill-treated?’ When
removing a saddle from a pony, he delights to dump it down on the ground,
_anywhere_, in sand, dust or mud, the side flaps crushed underneath
anyhow, although there may be half a dozen people standing by, ready to
carry it off to its proper place.

I fear these pages may seem full of dismal discouragement and gloomy
warnings, so, before leaving the subject, I will repeat once more that
the doki-boy is a criminal only from ignorance, that he is teachable, and
that, possibly, he appears a greater sinner because his evil deeds, as a
rule, are—or should be—committed before his master’s eyes, which is, in
itself, some little comfort!

The rainy season, from June till November, is the most unhealthy time
for ponies, especially in the Niger valley. They are very subject to
colic and to the peculiar form of horse-sickness which is attracting
so much attention from the medical and veterinary officers. It shows
itself in fever, weakness of the loins, swollen glands, and wasting away,
accompanied by a voracious appetite, and, so far, has not been definitely
diagnosed, though every effort is being made to understand its nature by
examining specimens of blood, etc. Arsenic has been suggested as a cure,
but at present it seems to me that, once the doctor or veterinary surgeon
has discovered the peculiar bacillus in the blood, there is little or
no hope of the pony’s complete recovery, and the best thing for the
unfortunate owner to do is to sell him for what he will fetch, or give
him away to a native. The native can frequently patch up a sick pony
till he is quite fit enough for the light work they give him, though he
would be quite useless for polo or hard marching. I have seen only too
many good little ponies die, and, once they sicken, I always feel that
the dosing and nursing is rather hopeless work, and the sure bullet the
kinder way; though, if it is determined to make a fight for the pony’s
life, the only way is to employ a native horse-doctor—he _may_ know more
about it than we do, and he certainly cannot well know less!

There are very few other ills that the West African stable is heir to,
if ordinary care and supervision are given. It is worth mentioning that
the mai-doki will ascribe everything that he cannot account for as the
result of cold, from a mosquito bite up to a serious sprain, and ‘Sainye
ya kamma shi!’ (‘he has caught cold’) will become a familiar sounding
phrase, and will have to be politely but firmly discouraged.




CHAPTER VI

Camp Life


After a year spent in Nigeria, I am sure you will agree with me, on
looking back, that the time spent ‘on tour’ was the happiest and
most enjoyable of all. The life in the open air, the constant change
and variety of scenery, the daily march that makes one so hungry at
meal-times and so sleepy long before recognized bed-time, the incessant
items of interest, among people, animals, birds, butterflies and
plants—all combine to make one think it an ideal existence, and one where
it is almost impossible to be cross, bored, or grumbly, in the clear
sunlight, and amongst some of the loveliest surroundings imaginable.
But this charming state of things is not to be reached all at once. To
begin with, you must start with a firm determination to make the best
of everything and anything: your unselfishness must be untiring and
your cheerfulness infectious; your husband is certain to have a little
leaven of difficult and possibly tiresome work mixed with his share of
the picnic, so at these times, at least, the give and take of daily life
may well be enhanced by lavish giving on your part. Here, no one can
help you but yourself; but I can do something else for you, and that is,
to supply you with a few hints, gathered from our own experience, which
will make the camp arrangements run smoothly, and ensure your comfort in
the remotest ‘bush.’ For it is not a sound argument to say, ‘If we get
so hungry, we shan’t be particular what we eat’—it is just when one is
famished that one wants a good, simple, well-cooked meal, not tough meat
and eggs of doubtful freshness. Do not be discouraged at the start; it
seems a colossal undertaking to calculate full provisions for some weeks,
but it is really a simple matter after a little practice. At the end of
this chapter you will find a list of stores necessary for the use of two
people going to camp, and out of reach of European stores, for a month.
The quantities are of necessity rather approximate, depending, as they
must in some cases, on individual taste. Wherever you go, the villages
can usually supply sheep, fowls, eggs, maize and yams, sweet potatoes and
fruit and guinea-corn, and in many places there is excellent bush-fowl
and guinea-fowl shooting to be had, thus adding the best of all dishes,
game, to the larder.

Stores are carried in ‘chop-boxes,’ i.e. deal boxes, with hinged lids,
hasps and padlocks, and with handles. For size, 18 in. × 10 in. × 8 in.
is about right, for they must be considered as loads, and it is no use
having them larger, as you will only have to leave them half empty, on
account of the weight, and things will tumble about and bottles get
broken. Even the size I have just mentioned cannot be packed full, but
when one wants to carry fruit, or any light addition, the space comes in
handy. We have found it useful, when bringing stores out from England (a
proceeding much to be recommended to the economical housekeeper), to have
a few of the cases made as described above, so as to have them ready for
touring after their contents have been removed. Three should be enough,
and one may usefully be devoted to rice alone, unless you are satisfied
with and sure of being able to obtain the native sort: a 50 lb. bag of
rice just fits in, and is invaluable, as fresh vegetables are almost
impossible to come by. We have a fitted chop-box, made to our own design,
containing a tray, and divers divisions, to accommodate china and glass.
Below, there is one space which holds the plates and dishes, another
that just fits two sparklet bottles, and a third which usually carries
the day’s supply of bread or biscuits. The tray contains the teapot,
four cups and saucers, milk-jug and sugar-basin (all china), and four
tumblers, all in their own partitions; the cruet-stand has also a little
corner to itself, where nothing ever upsets, and we are saved the eternal
worry of unscrewing patent receptacles to get at the salt, etc. This
leaves an empty space in the middle of the tray, where the small tins of
tea, sugar, milk, tea-cloth, etc., live, the idea being that breakfast,
luncheon, or tea, can be prepared at once, without touching the other
chop-boxes, if so desired. Knives, forks and spoons all have their own
separate spaces, a better arrangement than the usual leather straps in
the lid. The divisions are lined with felt, so that china tea-things and
glass tumblers (all of thickish material, of course), which, to my mind,
are so infinitely preferable to ironware as to make ‘all the difference,’
can be carried in safety for many months, even allowing for unlikely
accidents, such as a carrier slipping on a stone while fording a river,
etc.

On coming out here, we had ordered a costly luncheon basket from England
but, before it arrived we had done our first tour of some weeks’ duration
with the chop-box I have just described, and instantly decided that we
could not be bothered with the dainty, but much less serviceable little
arrangement of wicker, etc., so we rifled it of its least complicated
fittings, and wrote it down under the heading of ‘Experientia docet’ in
the household accounts.

[Illustration: ONE OF OUR CAMPS. (p. 275)]

[Illustration: THE MAIL-CART, BIDA. (p. 280)]

I will make no apology for having discussed this subject at such length,
for I know, from personal experience, what an immense difference to
one’s comfort a really practical chop-box makes; it is, therefore, worth
describing in detail, as such an article cannot be bought ready-made. It
is only necessary to add that the dimensions should be about 32 in. × 14
in. × 14 in., and the weight should not exceed 50 to 55 lb.

Don’t forget to take the indispensable mincing-machine; if necessary at
headquarters, it is doubly so in the bush, where you frequently have
to eat meat an hour or so after it has been killed. A Berkefeld filter
is the best, easily carried, simple and quick to work, beside being
simplicity itself to clean and fix up: there is another, on the foot-pump
principle, which saves labour, or at least exertion, but its extra weight
is a great drawback.

We will suppose, you are able to provide yourselves with two 80 lb.
Regulation Officer’s tents; Government supplies one, and you would do
well to bring a second as a private possession: one tent is quite too
small for two people, and it is a pity to lose so much comfort for a
detail so easily carried out. Have them pitched one behind the other,
the front one to serve for meals and daily occupation, the back one as
sleeping quarters. You can always get a small, roofless attachment, with
matting walls, erected in a few minutes, at the back of the sleeping
tent, to act as a bathroom. At times, when we felt fairly secure from
possible rain, we pitched the outer fly of the front tent in front again;
it is quite a simple matter, with the aid of a few extra poles, supplied
from the village, and extends one’s quarters delightfully, for a stay of
any length, if the camp is in a shady spot—otherwise, of course, it makes
the tents warm.

For camp furniture, none is better than the ‘X’ patent. The beds are most
comfortable, and are by no means the Japanese puzzle that some camp beds
are: there are excellent little tables, that can be put together in a
couple of minutes, and a canvas basin and bath of the same pattern. With
reference to the bath, I may say, that we have found it more convenient
to carry with us a regular tin, travelling bath, with cover and strap,
containing a wicker lining; it is so immensely useful for holding all
kinds of odd things: an enamelled washing-basin, fitted with a canvas
or leather cover and a strap, is also a great comfort, as, inside it,
the whole of your washing paraphernalia travels, and it is such a joy to
find everything you want under your hand, when your bath is temptingly
ready—the towels having been thrown over the bathroom wall to sun
themselves till you are ready for them.

Two really comfortable chairs of the ordinary, canvas, deck-chair pattern
are most desirable, in addition to the regulation, little sit-up armchair
affairs; a _lounge_ is what one wants after a long, hot march. We have
found it very useful to bring out, ‘on our own,’ an extra, small ‘X’
table, and a second armchair; the table being precious to a degree as a
dressing-table.

When the chop boxes are neatly ranged round the sides of your tent, and
the furniture, above mentioned, opened out, you will not care to fill up
any more space with unnecessary articles. But never allow yourself to be
uncomfortable for the want of things you are certain to miss every day:
it will spoil half your pleasure, and it is well worth the cost of an
extra carrier, if necessary, for the purpose. I fancy that every one,
after one tour in the bush, will find that experience teaches that a few
things taken, were useless, and some left behind were sorely wanted, and
a little judicious sorting and arrangement will ensure the second trip
being far more comfortable, without in the least increasing the bulk of
your _personnel_.

Personal clothing can be carried in tin uniform cases, and it should
be reduced as far as is compatible with the foregoing axiom. I have
found that a touring wardrobe, consisting of a habit skirt, boots,
etc., two coats, one short holland skirt, a plain tea-gown, two changes
of underclothing, a few muslin stocks, one pair of thick boots, and,
instead of slippers, long, loose, Hausa boots, can be easily packed into
a fair-sized uniform case. I always take, too, a folding Panama hat,
for wearing in camp (one marches, of course, in a solar topee); a very
small dressing-case, which is a great comfort, as it keeps all one’s
toilet necessaries together; a writing-case, tiny work-box, and sketching
materials, all packed in the one box.

The servants do the washing, in a rough and ready fashion, so that many
changes are absolutely unnecessary, especially as the items are not “got
up” at all, and can be washed and dried in an hour or two.

It is useful to have one extra tin case, not dedicated to any special
purpose: it acts as a sort of overflow box, and, indeed, one usually
finds it overflowing. One or two favourite books, sketching, or
photography, butterfly catching, and a small but “lasting” piece of
needlework, will amply fill up your leisure hours in camp. I remember a
friend of mine in India worked a quantity of very beautiful point lace
during a shooting trip in Kashmir; she used to sit on a box and stitch,
while the camp was being pitched and struck. Personally, I find, as a
rule, that after the inevitable preliminary arrangements and luncheon,
a change and a rest, a couple of sketches, and a stroll through the
village, tea-time and twilight come long before I am ready for them.

The camp kitchen requires a little special arrangement, and both mistress
and cook will have to employ their utmost ingenuity to prevent all the
culinary operations from being conducted on the bare ground. The cook
will not grumble, he rather enjoys squatting on his heels, balancing
pots and pans on a pile of blazing wood, and surrounding himself with a
charmed circle of feathers, egg-shells and onions. But as long as he
sees that all his implements are thoroughly cleansed and scrubbed—and
one need not go far to find sand in Africa—there need be no real
uncleanliness, however primitive the conditions; indeed, I always find
my camp kitchen far more accessible than the one at headquarters, where
a dash has to be made across a scorching compound at each visit. Many
a simple cooking lesson have we jointly given, in the open air, under
some shady tree, seated on boxes, wrestling with a wood fire in a light
breeze. A wide smooth board, scrubbed spotless every day, makes quite a
useful kitchen table, placed across two provision boxes; one side being
kept, scrupulously, for bread-making, etc., the other used for operations
involving meat, onions, etc. Another detail that requires the mistress’
assistance is a camp meat-safe—a few yards of mosquito netting or muslin,
and the frame of an old umbrella, will solve the difficulty at once. The
muslin must have a drawstring at the top and bottom, and the birds or
joints hung on to the ribs of the open umbrella, which swings gracefully
from the nearest tree.

For light, you cannot improve on the “Lord’s” lantern, issued by
Government: it gives a splendid light, and travels in its own case, which
also contains a canister, holding kerosene; this latter, however only
carries enough oil for about a fortnight, so it is necessary to take a
tin of kerosene as well. It is not wise to economize much over oil, for
a light should be kept burning all night where you sleep. We usually
carry also an excellent little lantern, fitted for candle or lamp, and
are therefore never condemned to that ‘dim, religious light’ which is so
conducive to most irreligious exclamations, when the master falls over a
gun-case in the dark, or wants to read a paper.

During our last leave we had made, to our own design, a small
arrangement, which, from personal experience, we can recommend most
strongly. It is a light wooden box, measuring about 18 in. × 14 in. ×
7 in.; with a hinged lid, lock and key. Inside it is lined with padded
baize, and divided into compartments, containing, respectively, a pair of
candle lamps, four glass globes, two punkah tops, and a box of candles.
This box travels everywhere in perfect safety, and is an endless comfort:
amongst other advantages, it saves the inconvenience of placing a heavy
“Lord’s” lantern on a small camp dinner-table, which always seems to
attract instantly every flying pest for a radius of fifty miles at least.
Moreover, during more than six months of almost incessant travelling,
only one globe has been broken.

The actual marching will, of necessity, and from choice too, be done in
the early morning, but if possible, when making the first start, let
it be in the afternoon, a short march of only an hour or two (this is
nearly always possible from any large centre), getting to your camp well
by daylight. This is essential; the carriers will not be accustomed to
their loads, they will all squabble and fight for the lightest ones,
and, even did you purpose a morning start, an early one would be an
impossibility. Then, on arrival in camp, no one knows where to put
anything, and there is certain to be much to arrange and alter, for the
West African servitor will, for the whole of your trip, place each chair
and box exactly where he planted them that first evening, so be warned
and, on that momentous occasion, insist upon having everything placed
exactly where you hope to find it every day for the next few weeks—so
much comfort depends on this. If you are accompanied by a military or
police escort, the tents will be pitched without any difficulty; but
otherwise, I fear that a little trouble and patience must be expended in
teaching the carriers this most important accomplishment.

But do not lose heart, and feel miserable and disappointed, if things
are rather in a muddle, the servants slow and unmethodical, the carriers
disposed to dump down their loads anywhere, and disappear into the
village. Take the word of a fairly old camping hand, things will be
better to-morrow, and better still the day after. Meantime, a kettle
can be boiled in a few minutes, and, though you are probably fatigued,
yourself, after much packing, and perhaps a longer ride than you have
taken for some time, a cup of tea will make a wonderful difference.
The mistress, who, after half an hour’s rest for every one, gets up
cheerfully from her comfortable chair, saying brightly, ‘Now then, Suli,
or Mohammadu, I am going to help you,’ can reduce chaos to order and
comfort in no time, and will find her servants willing to assist; for,
as I have said before in this chapter, cheerfulness is infectious, and
nowhere more so than amongst Africans. I have often seen a crowd of
sullen, angry faces suddenly break into happy, childish laughter, moved
by one well-timed joke.

Speaking from my own experience, I can only say that I consider the
carriers to be a much maligned set of folks; they are very easy to deal
with, and after the first march, there is never a dispute—except, of
course, over ‘chop’—the carrier fraternity would wrangle in Paradise over
the possession of half a yam. I have known most of them by name; on one
long tour they used to come and say ‘Good-morning’ with broadest smiles,
and, even after long and trying marches, they would go out into the bush,
entirely on their own initiative, and collect bunches of flowers for
‘Missis’ to decorate her tent and dinner-table with. Their affectionate
impulses went so far as to induce them to rifle birds’ nests and bring me
the fledglings, until I had to be severe about it. A little sympathetic
attention to their various ailments and wounds, makes them consider one
as a valuable ally and friend.

Once shaken down into the routine of marching, you will elect to get
up at dawn, your toilet will take about twenty minutes, and a simple
breakfast, consisting of coffee and eggs, or grilled chicken, should then
be ready. During breakfast, the carriers will pounce upon, and whisk
away, the whole contents of the camp, and in less than an hour from the
time you woke the long line will have streamed away into the distance,
the head-man having instructions where to pitch the next camp, and to
have a good supply of water and fire-wood ready. Your better half will
probably have a little work to do, in the shape of a final interview with
the Chief of the place, so the carriers can always get a good half-hour’s
start.

You will then begin your march, walking in the fresh, cool, morning air,
through the loveliest, greenest, dew-soaked country possible to find,
along the tiny footpaths, which constitute the ‘high roads’ in Nigeria.
I believe some people never walk a yard on the march, but I always
thoroughly enjoy it; it breaks the monotony of many hours in the saddle,
and, I think, must be good for one, as riding at a snail’s pace is not,
after all, very violent exercise.

If a march is extremely long, it is quite easy to keep the cook and a
few carriers, with table, chairs, etc., behind the others, have a cold
luncheon prepared the day before, and select a shady spot near water,
about half-way, for luncheon and a rest—as a rule, you will find that the
carriers have already selected it with some discrimination. The ordinary
day’s march occupies five or six hours, and averages from fifteen to
eighteen miles. This sounds very little, but it is as much as your
carriers and ponies (and yourself) are able for, without distress, and,
unless time is a serious consideration, I do not advocate marching again
in the afternoon. A Political Officer will usually have ample work at
each halting-place to occupy the hours of daylight. I have done seven and
eight hours in the saddle many a time, but it is tiring, hard work for
every one, and makes the whole thing a weariness, instead of a pleasure.

You will, I think, find, when you ride in, that tents have been pitched,
everything unpacked and made ready for you, the servants will have
rested, the cook will be hard at work, preparing luncheon, and the staff
will assure you, with smiling faces, that the march has been ‘not far too
much at all.’ If one anticipates several weeks of hard marching, it is
a good thing to hire small ponies for the cook and head steward, as it
ensures their arriving first, and arriving fresh.

The evening stroll at sunset is always full of interest for me. There
is the village to inspect, cloth-making and cotton-spinning to admire,
and, perhaps, many little trifles of Hausa leather work, etc., to buy.
In places where a white woman has never been seen before, she may cause
a panic among the simple souls. In one remote little Pagan village,
I remember, the men came, as usual, headed by their Chief, to the
‘palaver,’ and, at sight of me, they fell prostrate, covered their heads
with their flowing garments, lay on the ground and _moaned_ in fear,
refusing to be comforted till I retreated from the scene. I have since
discovered that an occasional albino negress (truly, a fearsome sight) is
held by them in great reverence, and practically worshipped!

In another village the people fled at the sight of me, the only person
holding his ground being a man, nursing a sick baby, who had high fever,
from teething pain. We prescribed, and supplied, for the poor mite,
a remedy so old-fashioned, that I almost blush to record it—a nicely
smoothed and rounded chicken bone! And, when the incessant wail of pain
died away, and the baby chewed contentedly at its ‘comforter,’ the
frightened women and children crept back and smiled, and told each other,
doubtless, that we were physicians of a very high order!

One can always, I find, gain the confidence of the women-kind, by taking
notice of the ‘pikkins,’ or by a little care and solicitude for a wound
or sore. Merely the applying of a clean bandage, personally, establishes
your position in the village as the ‘Godsent,’ and, which matters
more, as the friend of the ladies—for I have a strong conviction that
(in spite of the laments indulged in by good people at home, over the
sad position of the down-trodden woman of Africa) the ladies rule the
villages and set the public tone: I have seen most lively rows and free
fights started by one lady’s uncontrolled tongue, or quarrelsome temper.

You will, of course, like to see that your ponies are properly housed,
well-fed, and comfortable for the night. It is as well to take blankets
for them, in case they have to sleep in the open, or stand in the rain.
When possible, it is a great comfort to have an extra pony, to march
along with you—one of them may go sick or lame, on a rough road, and
have to be put out of work. Ponies usually fatten and thrive well on the
march, possibly because guinea-corn, etc., is so much more plentiful in
the bush than at headquarters; but it is decidedly anxious work, taking
horses one values into thick, forest country, where guinea-corn is not
obtainable and grass rank and scarce. Great care should be exercised over
the ponies’ drinking water, and they should _by no means_ be allowed to
drink at any pool or stream they may cross. I firmly believe that bad
water is one of the causes of much of the horse sickness so prevalent
here, and unless I can see clearly up and down stream for some distance,
and satisfy myself that the water is not full of decaying vegetation, nor
stagnating under overhanging branches, my pony has to wait for his drink
until a healthier state of things can be found.

Where roads are rough and stony, extra care is, of course, needed in
searching the ponies’ feet for stones—it may not occur to the doki-boys.

In some parts of the country tents are seldom necessary, as there are
rest-houses at all the halting-places on the main roads, and very
delightful they are to spend a day or two in, when they are watertight
and in good repair—simply shelters, with a very deep, low, thatched roof
coming to within four feet of the ground, no walls (grass ones can be
added by the villagers in half an hour, if desired), cosy, yet airy from
their great height, very roomy, and usually watertight; though, to ensure
this, when there is rain about, it is a good thing to pitch the outer fly
of a tent over your bed, thus securing a dry, comfortable night, even in
a tornado. In a few places, where the rest-house is placed in a forest
clearing, outside the village, it seems rather confiding to sleep so
insecurely, but I have been told that a lamp and mosquito curtains will
daunt any but the hungriest lion.

I have only one or two more suggestions to offer before closing this
chapter: the first and most important may not sound attractive, but it is
absolutely necessary—to put all the clothing you intend wearing the next
day _under your pillow at night_. Indeed, it is the only way to ensure
its being dry, the damp penetrates everywhere, and at 5 a.m. one does
not feel disposed to walk about, lightly clothed, unlocking boxes, and
extracting one’s garments.

Another small point, which is useful to know and act upon, is, that a
very small quantity of powdered alum will clear dirty, brackish water
very quickly; all the solid matter sinks to the bottom, and the clear
water can be poured off, thus saving the unpleasant necessity for a
muddy-looking, uninviting bath: a few crystals of permanganate of potash
are rather nice in a bath, too, when the water is unpleasant to smell and
look at.

On long marches it is worth while trying to cultivate a taste for Kola
nuts: they are marvellously refreshing and stimulating, and the clean,
bitter flavour is rather delightful once one is accustomed to it. I have,
often and often, staved off the pangs of hunger, thirst and fatigue, with
a Kola nut, the sharpness tempered by a piece of chocolate munched along
with it.

For the benefit of your servants and carriers, a few simple remedies,
easily obtained from the medical officers, should be taken into the bush;
they are tabulated below, with a list of stores. This last, it must be
remembered, is confined severely to necessaries; it can be supplemented
by all kinds of luxuries, such as tinned sardines, cheese, butter, potted
meat, etc., always bearing in mind that the total transport allowed by
Government, at present to each official on the march, is an average of
twelve to fourteen loads of fifty-six pounds each.


PROVISIONS NECESSARY FOR TWO PEOPLE FOR ONE MONTH

    4 lb. sugar.
    4 lb. tea.
    14 lb. flour.
    4 tins biscuits.
    18 tins milk.
    6 tins lard.
    6 tins jam.
    2 tins baking-powder.
    2 tins coffee.
    2 packets candles.
    1 packet matches.
    1 tin kerosene.
    12 boxes sparklets.
    2 bars soap.
    1 bottle curry-powder.
    12 soup squares.
    1 case whisky.
    1 case limejuice.
    salt, pepper, mustard, etc.


MEDICAL STORES

    1 roll lint.
    1 roll cotton-wool.
    1 packet bandages.
    1 tin Epsom salts.
    1 tin boracic powder.
    1 tin sulphur ointment.
    2 bottles liniment.
    1 bottle chlorodyne.
    A small quantity of iodoform ointment.




CHAPTER VII

What to Wear


I approach this subject with some diffidence, as it is one so differently
regarded by different individuals. No two people ever seem to agree about
clothing for the tropics, so I shall not attempt to offer opinions on the
merits or demerits of ‘flannel next the skin,’ etc., but shall confine
myself to a few general hints, which, I hope, may be equally useful to
the disciple of Jaeger and Viyella, and to the advocate of muslin and
cambric.

One broad axiom that none will dispute, I may give safely: in all kinds
of clothes, aim at variety rather than at super-excellence of quality
and delicacy of trimming. Remember that you have to wear washing gowns
all the year round, and their constant attendance at the wash-tub will
destroy them very quickly if you have only three or four to ring the
changes on. This applies especially to white gowns, which, cool and
dainty as they are, I do not recommend very strongly, as a dusty path or
a shower of rain will make them unwearable after half an hour, and back
they must go to the washerman, who proceeds to forcibly illustrate the
meaning of ‘wear and tear.’

Linen skirts of any colour that is not too delicate are invaluable; half
a dozen of them, one or two holland, and a couple of simple muslins or
cool cottons, should carry you triumphantly through your time. The woman
endowed with clever fingers can, of course, add to her stock, armed with
good paper patterns, lengths of unmade material, and, if she is lucky,
a sewing-machine, and she will probably be very glad of the occupation
for her spare time. Shirts and blouses of thin flannel, washing silk
and muslin can be brought in any number that space allows—the more the
better, but the local laundry cannot goffer frills and almost always
tears lace! Cambric and muslin blouses of the ‘shirt’ order are the
most useful kind, as silk rots almost at once. For this reason let your
smarter blouses be of _crêpe de chine_ rather than silk. Evening gowns
you will scarcely want; one, or at most two simple dinner frocks, and
a tea-gown to wear for dinner at home, will be ample. For the benefit
of those who may have to spend some time on tour, I may mention that I
derive the greatest comfort from a very thin cashmere or nun’s veiling
tea-gown, or rather an elaborate dressing-gown for dinner in camp, and
also find it useful as a dressing-gown during the colder part of the
voyage. You will want one warm dress of the coat-and-skirt description
to start your voyage in, for it is usually quite cold from Liverpool
to the Canaries. It should be of the plainest tailor-made sort; once
arrived in Africa you will not wear it again, probably, until you reach
the same point on your way home. The same may be said of what was once
described to me as a ‘human’ hat, unless it is of the very plainest; for
some reason which I cannot quite define, but can nevertheless thoroughly
appreciate, a ‘smart’ hat looks absolutely ludicrous out here: in fact,
any tendency to over-dressing has only one effect, that of making your
company, usually a few hard-working men, feel thoroughly uncomfortable.
All one wants, after all, is to appear fresh, spotless and dainty, which
can be best accomplished by a clean linen frock, a shady simple straw
hat, a sensible sunshade and garden gloves.

If it will not quite break your heart, be advised and brush back your
fringe, if you have one; it is quite impossible to keep it in curl or
tidy, and the peace and comfort you will get from the absence of clammy
dank wisps of short hair will amply repay you for what you may think
an unbecoming change. May I also whisper that no one should allow her
friends at home to persuade her to invest in an ‘artistic and invisible’
‘transformation’; they are all too visible, and, for this country, are
simply waste of money.

In Nigeria there is nearly always a breeze modifying the damp
heat, which reminds me that a light cloth or flannel coat is rather
indispensable for sitting outside after tennis, on cool evenings; and,
when it sets to work to rain after a sultry day, one finds it very chilly
in muslin, the temperature drops so suddenly and considerably, that a
thin serge or flannel skirt is exceedingly comfortable.

Your riding-habit should consist of a very short skirt of moderate
thickness; I am no believer in what tailors call ‘Colonial’ habits, they
very seldom set so comfortably, and never wear so well as a good solid
cloth; moreover, the gain in coolness is not perceptible: at least, that
has been my experience, after some years in India. For underneath you
will find rather loose knickers most comfortable, made of dark coloured
washing material; the best is called ‘moleskin’ by breeches-makers, and
is used for the thinnest kind of riding-breeches for men. Don’t have your
knickers made by a habit-maker, simply have a good pattern of bicycling
knickers copied; two pairs should be quite enough. A cloth coat is
unnecessary; a few holland and white drill loose coats will answer much
better, and, as starched collars are somewhat at a discount, soft white
muslin scarves, worn like a hunting-stock, look neat and are comfortable.
I think it is a considerable advantage to have your habit very short
indeed, as, while touring, it is a great pleasure and variety to walk the
first few miles of the march, a pleasure which is completely spoilt if
you have to hold up a heavy habit skirt. Riding on tour is such crawling
work, that, if you prefer it, you could quite well ride your marches in
an ordinary short walking skirt, though personally I think there is no
garb so entirely comfortable as well-fitting riding garments.

For those wise women who adopt the ‘astride’ position, a divided skirt
is, of course, necessary. The very best is, I believe, made by Ross of
Bond Street, but that, being the perfection of cut and smartness, is,
naturally, an expensive investment, and for rough work in this country
an ordinary divided bicycling skirt would answer perfectly, or else full
bloomers worn with shooting boots and putties and a rather long-skirted
coat—personally, I should advocate the latter.

Bear well in mind, there must be no trifling with your mackintosh! When
it rains in West Africa, it _does_ rain, and you want the most serious
and really waterproof mackintosh obtainable. I have found that the
essential point is to have it of a light weight, loose and easy to slip
into, at a moment’s notice, even on a plunging frightened pony, when
the tornado catches one on the march. _The_ firm of all others for this
purpose is Burberry, in the Haymarket. I doubt whether any umbrella
really keeps out the rain; for ordinary use, I should advise a strong
silk _en-tout-cas_ of a dark colour that will serve equally well for sun
or shower. You will also want a really big cotton umbrella, lined with
green—in fact, it would be a graceful attention to bring a second one for
your better half, as they are quite necessary for and constantly used by
men who have to go out in the sun in the middle of the day.

It will be wise to stock yourself before leaving home with all small
etceteras, such as ribbons, laces, buttons, thread, needles, etc. We
cannot yet buy ‘chiffons’ in Nigeria, and, unless you bring them all with
you, it entails writing home, and waiting two months for a reel of silk
or a packet of needles. I remember well being utterly unable to get from
market or stores a single reel of white cotton, for weeks, and my husband
being reduced to wearing a highly decorative but somewhat unusual pair of
amateur boot-laces made of bright crimson Hausa leather!

Boots must be fairly solid as to soles; the soil of West Africa seems
to have a specially destructive effect on English leather. In Sierra
Leone, for instance, the soles are worn out in a few weeks, though in
Nigeria things are not so bad; for while in Sierra Leone, I walked
because I loathed crawling in a hammock, here, with ponies, walking is
not a bit necessary. Still, it is impossible to get boots resoled, so
as to be wearable, therefore do not economize in this direction, only
remember that all your foot-gear must be constantly worn or it will
spoil. Blacking boots are only a vexation, they always seem sticky,
and dirty one’s hands and skirts; I should recommend a stout, _really_
stout, pair of tan laced boots for heavy walking, about half a size
larger than usual, a lighter pair for ordinary wear (tan buckskin is
delightfully cool and soft for the dry weather), and a couple of pairs
of walking-shoes of tan or black glacé kid. It is useless to lay down
anything definite, as people use their feet so differently; some are hard
on boots, while others can wear them for years apparently. Of course,
boot-trees have a good deal to say to the longevity of foot-gear, and,
now that such light ones are to be had, three or four pairs would not
be too many. I have heard it said that walking-shoes are dangerous on
account of snakes, but they are far cooler than boots, and one really
does not have to pick one’s way among snakes as a rule, and I have
always found them a pleasant variety. About indoor shoes you will, of
course, decide for yourself; I think perhaps they wear out quicker than
at home—mine do, at all events, but my incessant perambulations in the
garden, stables, etc., may have something to do with that! They should be
glacé kid, not patent leather, on account of coolness.

Riding-boots ought to be tan, and a very easy fit; I have been told that
stiffened canvas uppers and tan-leather feet constitute delightfully cool
riding-boots, but I have no personal experience of them, and think one
can hardly improve on good tan leather: I have never desired anything
cooler, even in a Punjab hot weather. A little toilet powder sprinkled
inside makes them much easier to pull on.

Mosquitoes do not deal more gently with us here than they do elsewhere;
all the men wear long loose boots, made in this country, of Hausa
leather; they are an absolute protection, and, if somewhat too clumsy
for a lady’s wear, as a rule, they are exceedingly useful in camp. For
ordinary use, a pair of black canvas gaiters, buttoned and reaching to
the knee, can be worn over ordinary evening slippers. They are so neat
as not to be noticeable at all, and are an absolute protection when
mosquitoes are numerous and hungry.

So much for your outer woman. At the end of this chapter, I am giving a
list of what appears to me the least possible supply of clothes to make
you comfortable, and, bearing in mind that it takes two months to get
additions out from Home, even to Lokoja, and much longer up country, you
will doubtless agree that it is best to be independent. You will want a
large quantity of underclothing, and, first of all, you must decide for
yourself about the solidity of vests, etc. I cannot suggest hygienic
principles, as I never practise them; do as you are accustomed to do,
as that appears to make for comfort. I met one lady in Africa, who told
me she wore _merino combinations_, because, having worn them always in
England, she felt cold without them—and this in a mean temperature of
eighty or ninety degrees!

I think perfect comfort and happiness can be found in fine cambric or
nainsook combinations, or spun-silk vests and cambric knickers. I rather
doubt the desirability of washing-silk under-garments, chiefly because
the art of laundry work is in its infancy, and the silk shirts that I
have had washed have returned distinctly hard and harsh. But the main
point, in a climate like this, is to have enough of whatever you decide
to wear; you will probably change everything two or three times a day,
and washing is not done here in a day or two, as it is in India. Let
everything be of the thinnest texture, compatible with bad washing.
The Lahman underwear is excellent in its thinnest qualities, and is
invariably praised by those who wear it.

A supply of old underlinen to wear on the voyage and throw overboard is
invaluable; I dislike nothing more than arriving at one’s destination
with a bulging soiled-linen bag, and an uncertain prospect of getting
it converted into clean clothes. On the way home this is quite a simple
matter; after twelve months in the hands of the gentle African laundry
folk, most of your underlinen will be fit for nothing else!

At least six pairs of corsets are necessary, the coolest kind obtainable,
certainly, but I can assure you that to leave off wearing them at any
time for the sake of coolness is a huge mistake: there is nothing so
fatiguing as to lose one’s ordinary support even with a view to being
‘comfy,’ _Always_ wear corsets, even for _tête-à-tête_ home dinner on
the warmest evenings; there is something about their absence almost as
demoralizing as hair in curling-pins!

I should avoid expensive and ‘faddy’ varieties of underclothing. I
remember when I first went to India, I was induced to buy, at a guinea
each, four night-dresses of some special mixture of silk and wool,
which, I was told, would be ‘ideal wear’ for the Red Sea and other
warm localities. Perhaps I am hopelessly prejudiced against anything
resembling flannel, but I thought them _horrible_, and after enduring
one for half an hour, they were all stowed away, to be presented to my
‘ayah’ at the first opportunity. If you think fit to wear a kamerband at
night (a distinctly prudent proceeding), a yard or two of white flannel,
simply torn into lengths about eighteen inches wide, and worn outside the
nightdress, answers the purpose better than anything else; the nights are
almost invariably cool, and usually breezy towards dawn.

With these few hints, aided by your own common sense, I think your outfit
is sure to be successful and satisfactory, and your comfort and dainty
appearance assured; so I need say no more, except a word or two on the
subject of a sun-hat, which you _must_ have, no matter how much your
artistic feelings may rebel against it. Be sure it is large enough, for
the part that needs most protection is the back of the neck, and no
helmet-shaped ‘topi’ will give you real shade there. I like best the
spreading, mushroom shaped wide-brimmed hat, which will fit well down
over back hair and all, so that hat-pins and chin-strap can be dispensed
with. A grey hat, with a grey silk puggaree looks—well, as nice as a
solar topi can be made to look! With this and a couple of simple straw or
Panama hats, you will need no more; the appearance of the latter can be
varied by different ribbons and scarves to relieve the monotony.

If you have any favourite kinds of scent, soap or powder, bring them with
you; scent and powder are not to be bought here, of course, and one’s
‘very own’ soap is a delightful small luxury everywhere. I should like
to say a word for ‘Papier poudre.’ It is the greatest boon in a hot damp
climate, which gives a tendency to greasiness to the best complexions,
and does far less harm than the use of powder; moreover, it never leaves
white streaks on nose or cheeks, even if you pass the little, scented,
absorbent leaf over your face without a mirror.

Now as to boxes, and I have done.

I should strongly advise against the usual leather cabin trunks; they are
so heavy that, although it is true that they fit under a berth, it is a
herculean task to pull them out for anything you may happen to want.
They are likewise too heavy and too large for one carrier’s load, and so
are useless for camp travelling; they wear badly too under rough usage,
which they are quite certain to get. Use regulation tin ‘uniform cases,’
sized approximately 36 in. × 12 in. × 15 in. This is the ideal size for
a carrier’s load, which he carries on his head, steadied with one hand,
so you can imagine that anything much wider than the above dimensions
is a great sorrow to him. But I think, for the sake of your skirts, you
might be allowed one box a little longer, say 42 in., or just long enough
to take a skirt without folding; for the average carrier will make no
objection as to length, so long as you consider his feelings as to width.
You will find these boxes handier too in the cabin; you can put a couple
of them under the sofa-berth, and feel fairly independent of the sea
that comes in once or twice on every voyage. On the journey up river,
on the little stern-wheelers, space is a great consideration, and a big
trunk quite un-get-at-able; one feels less compunction in improvising a
seat out of a tin box than out of a leather one, and seats have to be
improvised very often on these occasions!

The following list is only intended as a basis to work on, and to be
added to as your fancy dictates and your purse allows:—

    Six cambric night-dresses.
    Two flannel night-dresses.
    Twelve cambric combinations.
    Six pairs cambric knickers.
    Twelve spun silk vests.
    Six pairs tan thread stockings.
    Six pairs black thread stockings.
    Three white petticoats.
    Two silk moirette petticoats (wears much better than silk).
    Two dozen handkerchiefs.
    Six pairs corsets.
    Twelve camisoles.
    One white (washing) dressing-gown.
    One woollen dressing-gown.
    Four linen skirts.
    Two holland or drill skirts.
    Two muslin dresses.
    One cloth gown.
    One tea-gown.
    Two evening gowns.
    Blouses _ad. lib._
    One habit skirt.
    Four riding coats.
    Two pairs riding breeches.
    Two Panama hats.
    One solar topi.
    One light coat.
    One _en-tout-cas_.
    One sunshade.
    One mackintosh.
    One pair thick tan boots.
    One pair tan walking boots.
    One pair tan glacé walking shoes.
    One pair black glacé walking shoes.
    Six pairs house slippers.
    One pair tan riding boots.




INDEX


  A

  Abadie, Captain, 107

  “Aerolite,” 174

  Aiede, 19

  Albino, 20

  Anglo-French Boundary Commission, 184, 185

  Anglo-German Boundary Commission, 50

  Ant hills, 18

  Arab merchants, 140

  Ashburnham, Captain, 2

  Astride, riding, 265


  B

  Badjibo, 155

  Balu, 181

  Bargery, Mr. and Mrs., 190

  Bebeji, 71

  Benue, river, 50

  Bida, 27, 185
    market of, 189

  “Binkie,” 62

  Bird-life, 156

  _Black Swan_, 50

  Borgu, 147
    people of, 177
    superstitions of, 178

  Boxes, 301

  “Boys,” 214

  Bryophyllum, 139

  Bunu language, 121
    funeral ceremonies, 122

  Burglary, 63

  Burutu, 3

  Bussa, 160


  C

  Camp life, 271
    kitchen, 278
    provisions, 289

  Cannas, 17

  Carriers, 282

  Carts (mono-wheel), 66

  Chop-boxes, 272

  Churn, 234

  Cook, native, 208

  Coronation Day, 22, 25

  Cows, 234


  D

  Dogs, 221
    feeding of, 223
    dosing of, 224

  “Doki boy,” 259, 262

  Duck-shooting, 42


  E

  Egga, 37

  Ekiurin, 17

  Erun, 22


  F

  Filter, 201

  Fish, 157

  “Flamboyant,” 7

  “Fritz,” 151

  Fruit, 214

  Furniture, 196
    bedroom, 202


  G

  Ganna, 40, 89

  Garden, 239
    flower, 240
    verandah, 248
    vegetable, 249

  Girouard, Sir Percy, K.C.M.G., 191

  Gloriosa Superba, 12

  Goldsmith, Mr., 26


  H

  Hadeija, 99
    Emir of, 100
    departure from, 104

  Hasler, Major, 70

  Hausa embroidery, 30
    scholarship, 59

  Home, the, 195

  Horse-doctor, native, 57

  Horses, feeding of, 260

  Household, 205
    wages of, 206
    servants, 207

  Housekeeping, 210


  I

  Igarra, 127

  Ilesha, 170
    funeral at, 171

  Illo, 161

  Incubator, 229

  Isochelis, 139


  J

  _Jebba_, the, 58

  Jebba, 153

  Ju-ju hill, 124
    house, 17
    rock, 154


  K

  Kabba, 15, 112, 115
    Ilorin boundary, 138

  Kaiama, 167
    Sariki of, 168

  Kano, 73
    Emir of, 79
    residency, 82

  _Karonga_, the, 5

  Karshi, 108

  Katāgum, 92

  Keffi, 47

  Kemball, General and Mrs., 35

  _Kigelia Africana_, 139

  Kishra, 176

  Kitchen, Nigerian, 209


  L

  Lawn, 244

  Lions, 166

  Lokoja, 8

  Look-out hill, 120

  Lukpa, 15


  M

  Marabouts, 96

  Meat, 211

  Mexican poppy, 138

  Moloney, Captain, 54

  Momo, 39

  Mosquito net, 203

  Mungo Park, death of, 175

  Mureji, 110

  Murmur, 97

  _Mussaenda Elegans_, 13


  N

  Nassuf, 140


  O

  Oduapi, 13

  Osé River, 21

  Ostrich, tame, 96

  Oudney, Richard, 97

  Oven, native, 38

  Oxen, pack, 88

  Oysters, 178


  P

  Palm-cats—_Nandinia binotata_, 137

  Patti Abaja, 136

  Patti hill, 8

  Phillips, Captain, D.S.O., 129

  Poultry, 226
    feeding of, 231

  Preperanda, 6


  R

  Rapids, ascending, 159

  Rapids at Wuru, 160
    at Mullale, 185

  Riding habit, 294
    boots, 297


  S

  Saddlery, 264

  Salla, great, 189

  _Sekondi_, the, 1

  Semolika, 126
    attack on, 131
    stool, 134

  Serval cat, 182

  Sierra Leone, 1

  Slaves, 47

  Sokoto, disaster at, 162

  Stable, the, 257

  Stern-wheelers, 5

  Steward, duties of, 214

  Stone, Mr., 3

  Strophanthus, 138


  T

  Tornado, dry, 163
    at Kaiama, 173

  Transhipping, 147

  Transport, animal, 85

  Trees and shrubs, 245


  U

  Underclothing, 298

  “Uwāmu,” 95


  V

  Vegetables, 213


  W

  Wa-wa, 165

  Wear, what to, 291

  Wilmot, Mr. and Mrs., 133


  Z

  Zaria, 70

  Zinnias, 70

  Zungeru, 65

[Illustration: BUTLER & TANNER

THE SELWOOD PRINTING WORKS

FROME]





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A RESIDENT'S WIFE IN NIGERIA ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The magazine of history with notes and queries (Vol. I, No. 1, January 1905)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The magazine of history with notes and queries (Vol. I, No. 1, January 1905)

Author: Various

Release date: July 17, 2024 [eBook #74062]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: William Abbatt, 1905

Credits: Richard Tonsing, hekula03, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAGAZINE OF HISTORY WITH NOTES AND QUERIES (VOL. I, NO. 1, JANUARY 1905) ***





                           VOL. I      NO. 1
                                  THE
                          MAGAZINE OF HISTORY
                                  WITH
                           NOTES AND QUERIES
                              JANUARY 1905

                             WILLIAM ABBATT

                      281 FOURTH AVENUE, NEW YORK

       Published Monthly      $5.00 a Year      50 Cents a Number




                        THE MAGAZINE OF HISTORY

                         WITH NOTES AND QUERIES

                 VOL. I      JANUARY, 1905.      NO. 1




                                CONTENTS


 THE BRONZE TABLET ERECTED AT QUEBEC TO
   COMMEMORATE MONTGOMERY’S DEFEAT                        _Frontispiece_
                                                                    PAGE
 THE ORIGIN OF THE MASSACHUSETTS MILITIA             JAMES J. TRACY    1
           Chief of the Massachusetts State Archives Division
 A BIT OF CHURCH HISTORY                         REV. ROSCOE NELSON   10
                   (The First Church, Windsor, Conn.)
 ARNOLD AND MONTGOMERY AT QUEBEC.                    (Illustration)   13
             The Bronze Tablet Commemorating Arnold’s Defeat
 A “SCRUB-POETICAL” ANSWER TO A GOVERNOR            OTIS G. HAMMOND   18
 HAS GOVERNOR LOVELACE OF NEW YORK BEEN
   PROPERLY IDENTIFIED?                               W. G. STANARD   30
 THE INFLUENCE OF SLAVERY ON THE OLD SOUTHERN
   CIVILIZATION                                         H. E. BELIN   34
 ANTHONY WALTON WHITE, BRIGADIER IN THE            A. S. GRAHAM and
   CONTINENTAL ARMY                             ANNA M. W. WOODHULL   40
 ORIGINAL DOCUMENTS
  Two Eighteenth Century Letters                                      45
  The Panama Canal Twenty-five Years Ago                              48
  The Earliest Known Autograph of Benedict Arnold                     50
 MAGAZINE OF HISTORY NOTICE                                           51
 GENEALOGICAL                                                         53
 MINOR TOPICS: A Committee to Visit Nova Scotia                       56
 BOOK NOTICES                                                         57
 ANNOUNCEMENTS                                                        58

Entered as second-class matter, March 1, 1905, at the Post Office at New
York, N. Y., under the Act of Congress of March 3, 1879.

                  _Copyright, 1905, by William Abbatt_

[Illustration:

  SCENE OF MONTGOMERY’S DEFEAT.

  Tablet placed by the Literary and Historical Society of Quebec, 1904.
]




                        THE MAGAZINE OF HISTORY

                         WITH NOTES AND QUERIES

                  VOL. I      JANUARY, 1905      NO. 1




                THE ORIGIN OF THE MASSACHUSETTS MILITIA


Prior to the outbreak of the Revolution the militia of the Province of
Massachusetts Bay was governed by the provisions of an act for
regulating the militia, passed in 1693. Although quaint and antiquated
in its provisions, it seems to have sufficed for all practical purposes;
and no other act was passed regulating the militia until the Provincial
Congress, almost at the beginning of its sittings, took steps to place
the militia of the Province upon a different basis in order to find
themselves prepared for the impending contest with the mother country,
which at that date, October, 1774, was patent to all men as an
unavoidable conflict.

It may be interesting to note some of the provisions and requirements
that governed the militia during the Province period under the old act
referred to. The act provided that all male persons from sixteen years
of age to sixty, with certain exceptions, should bear arms and duly
attend all musters and military exercises of the respective troops and
companies wherein they were listed, allowing three months’ time to every
son, next after his coming to sixteen years of age, and to every servant
for the same period after his time was out, to provide themselves with
arms, ammunition, etc. It also provided that, if any person liable to be
listed as aforesaid—_i.e._, as a member of any troop or company, in the
precinct or town where he resided—should avoid service by shifting from
house to house or place to place, to avoid being listed as a member of a
troop or company, he should be fined ten shillings for every offence,
the money to be paid over to the company to which he belonged.
Regimental musters, except in Boston, were to be held but once in three
years; but the act provided that every captain, or chief officer, of a
company or troop, should draw forth his company or troop four days
annually, and no more; to exercise them in motions, the use of arms, and
shooting at marks, or other military exercises. The punishment for any
disorders or contempt committed by any member of a company on a training
day or on a watch was to be by laying neck and heels, riding the wooden
horse, or ten shillings’ fine. The exemptions from training included the
members of the Council, the Representatives for the time being, the
Secretary, Justices of the Peace, the President, Fellows, students, and
servants of Harvard College, Masters of Art, ministers, elders and
deacons of churches, sheriffs, physicians, surgeons, and professed
schoolmasters, all such as had held commissions and served as field
officers or captains, lieutenants or ensigns; coroners, treasurers, the
Attorney-General, deputy sheriffs, clerks of courts, constables,
constant ferrymen, and one miller to each gristmill. In addition there
were exempted officers employed in connection with the Crown Revenue
service, all masters of vessels of thirty tons and upwards, constant
herdsmen, persons lame or otherwise disabled in body (on production of a
certificate from two surgeons), Indians and negroes. It also provided
that where any person could not provide his own arms, corn or other
merchantable provision or vendable goods, to the extent of one-fifth
part more than the value of the arms and ammunition, might be proffered
to the clerk of the company, who was authorized to sell it and thus
provide the person with the necessary arms. In case any were too poor to
even supply merchandise, the arms were to be provided from the town
stock. It also provided that a stock of powder and ammunition should be
held in every town, and from time to time be renewed by the Selectmen.
The necessary stock of powder, arms, and ammunition, was to be secured
by a rate equally and justly laid upon the inhabitants and estates in
such towns; and the rate for this purpose was collected by the
constables, who were authorized, in case of non-payment, to distrain as
for other rates. Under this act the militia of the Province were
governed, and from the militia so authorized were raised the troops who
formed the contingent of Provincials in the various expeditions against
Canada, and proved their natural military capacity and their inherent
quality as good soldiers at the siege of Louisburg, the expedition
against Crown Point, and upon other occasions, as well as in various
minor engagements with the Indian enemy upon the eastern and western
frontiers of the Province.

After the events of the Stamp Act and when it became a certainty that
the colonists could hope for nothing from the tyrannical ministry of
Great Britain, and all thinking men faced the possibility of armed
resistance to the mother country, it became necessary for those
foreseeing the event and in the forefront of the Revolutionary party to
provide a more elastic instrument and one more responsive to their
urgent needs than could be looked for under the old militia act.
Accordingly, in the first Provincial Congress, on the 26th of October,
1774, a committee appointed to consider what was necessary to be done
for the defence and safety of the Province made a report upon which a
resolve was immediately passed, making provision for the appointment of
a Committee of Safety, who were empowered and directed to alarm, muster,
and cause to be assembled, with the utmost expedition, such and so many
of the militia of the Province, completely armed and equipped, as they
might judge necessary for any contingency they might be called upon to
confront. Provision was made for the pay and subsistence of any force
that might be so assembled, and for the appointment of general officers,
inasmuch as some of the officers holding commissions under crown
appointments might have, and no doubt did hold, what were at the time
conservative opinions concerning the causes that had led to the bitter
feeling between the people of the Colonies and the ministers of Great
Britain. It was resolved that such companies as had not already chosen
officers should do so forthwith; and, where said officers should judge
the districts included within the regimental limits too extensive, they
should divide them and adjust their limits, and proceed to elect field
officers to command the regiments, so called. The effect of this action,
when carried out, was to practically redistrict the whole militia of the
Province, and provide them with company officers and field officers that
were in sympathy with the popular feeling; and this change took effect
upon the initiative of what was practically a convention of delegates
from the people, who had assembled in response to a call to take
measures to save the Province from what they considered violation of
their rights and privileges, and from aggressive militarism.


                     THE MINUTE-MEN: WHAT THEY WERE

It was at the same time provided that one-quarter, at least, of the
respective companies in every regiment should be formed into companies
of fifty privates at the least, who were to equip and hold themselves in
readiness to march at the shortest notice from the Committee of Safety
upon any emergency. Each company so formed was to choose a captain and
two lieutenants, and they were to be grouped in battalions to consist of
nine companies each and the captains and subalterns of each battalion
were to elect field officers to command them. These were the minute-men,
and were organized under this resolve, nearly six months before the
affair of April 19, 1775; and the promptness with which they assembled
in response to the alarm upon that memorable occasion is thereby
accounted for. The foregoing statement will also serve to explain what
has been a matter of confusion to many people; namely, the distinction
between minute-men and militia. The minute-men, while of the militia,
were, for a short time at the beginning of the war, a distinct body
under a separate organization. A minute-man was a member of the militia
who had engaged himself, with others, to march at a moment’s warning;
while a militiaman was one who had not so engaged, and yet was equally
liable to be called upon for service, when the Committee of Safety
should deem it necessary to order out the militia. It happened,
therefore, that companies of minute-men and companies of militia from
the same town responded under different commanders to the alarm of April
19, 1775. The service of one was as patriotic as that of the other; but
the minute-men were under special engagement to hold themselves in
readiness to march at a moment’s warning, and you may assume that they
were, as a rule, the youngest, most active, and most patriotic members
of their respective communities.

In December, 1774, a patriotic address by the committee on the state of
the Province was accepted by the Provincial Congress, and a copy thereof
sent to all the towns and districts in the Province. In this address
after a recital of the grievances and oppressions laid upon the people,
and of the necessity of guarding their rights and liberties, it was
recommended that particular care should be taken by each town and
district to equip each of the minute-men not already provided therewith
with an effective firearm, bayonet, pouch, knapsack, thirty rounds of
ball cartridges and that they be disciplined three times a week and
oftener, as opportunity might offer. The militia in general were also
not to be neglected, and their improvement in training and drill was
strongly recommended. Thus early before open hostilities were declared
did the Provincial Congress of Massachusetts take prompt and energetic
measures to place themselves upon a military footing, so as not to be
taken at a disadvantage when the shock of armed strife should occur.

The second Provincial Congress in February, 1775, confirmed the powers
of the Committee of Safety, to whom all military matters were directly
intrusted, repeated the recommendations of the previous Congress
relative to the militia, and appointed four general officers. The
commanding officer of each regiment of minute-men, as well as the
colonels of the militia regiments, were recommended to review their
respective commands and to make return of their number and equipment.
Six days before the 19th of April the Committee of Safety was authorized
to form six companies of the train artillery already provided by the
Colony, to immediately enter upon a course of discipline and be ready to
enter the service whenever an army should be raised.

The events of the historic 19th of April, 1775, brought matters to a
crisis more rapidly than had been anticipated; and, following that
incursion of the British troops (_excursion_ it is sometimes called in
the quaint language of the day, although one would hardly term it a
pleasant one), the Provincial Congress resolved that an army of 13,600
men should be raised immediately by the Province of Massachusetts Bay. A
few days later it was moved and passed that the companies in each
regiment should consist of fifty-nine men, including three officers, and
that each regiment should consist of ten such companies.

The militia and minute-men, as reorganized and prepared in accordance
with the directions of the Provincial Congress, responded with marvelous
promptitude when the call to arms came. Within ten days after the battle
of Lexington between fifteen and twenty thousand men had assembled at
Cambridge and Roxbury. But it was an armed assemblage rather than an
army. There was practically no cohesion beyond the company organization.
They were not accustomed to act with other units as battalions or
regiments. There was no term or limit of service prescribed or that
could be required of these men that came forward in response to the
alarm. Their own patriotic fervor or the persuasiveness of their
officers made the measure of their stay in the service. It was, in
consequence, a fluctuating force from day to day, with arrivals and
departures in constant progress. The problems involved in making it a
united or cohesive force for either aggression or defence would drive
the modern military man frantic. Yet of necessity this force had to
serve as the nucleus of the army it was proposed to raise to serve for
eight months or to December 31, 1775.

The method of recruiting seems odd in these days, but in reality it was
simple enough and was effective at the same time. “Beating orders,” as
they were called, were issued to captains and lieutenants, or rather to
those desiring to be commissioned in such capacities; and, upon their
securing the specified number of men agreeing to serve under them, they
were accepted with their men, and their commissions assured to them. In
this way the men practically chose their officers, while at the same
time each officer in a regiment from the colonel down became his own
recruiting officer, captains and lieutenants in order to fill up their
company strength, and colonels in order to obtain their full quota of
companies. No commissions were issued to any regiment until it was
completed. It was this practice that caused several New Hampshire
companies to be embodied in Massachusetts regiments.

The effectiveness of this method of enlistment can best be judged by the
fact, officially verified, that commissions had been issued to the
officers of fifteen regiments, they having at that time the proper
complement of men. It could not be expected, under the conditions that
prevailed, that an army so hastily gotten together and formed from small
local organizations, totally unused to acting in masses under any
military system as regiments or brigades, should have presented, either
in the matter of discipline or equipment, anything that would commend
itself to the trained military man. One thing, however, all those who
had assembled, whether as minute-men or militia, possessed in common;
and that was the patriotic determination to resist by every means in
their power any further encroachment upon their rights and liberties. A
goodly number of the recruits and many of the officers had served in the
expeditions against Canada; and these were sufficient to leaven the
mass, and communicate by example and precept something of the military
spirit to their younger comrades who had never rendered service in the
field. At that time the army was a Massachusetts army, and in fact it is
so termed in the official documents. The regiments were really what
would be designated in these days as State regiments, being enlisted,
officered, and maintained entirely by Massachusetts. There was no lack
of officers of the higher grades, as there were provided in addition to
the general officers previously named as having been appointed in making
the establishment for the organization of the army, May 23, 1775, one
lieutenant-general, two major-generals, four brigadier-generals, two
adjutant-generals, and two quartermaster-generals.

By June 13, 1775, it had been resolved that twenty-three regiments
should be commissioned, exclusive of one regiment of artillery, which
latter was to consist of ten companies, and had already been partly
organized. Such were the constituent parts of the army organized by
Massachusetts inside of two months after the 19th of April, 1775, from
her local militia; and it was these same raw and undisciplined levies,
assisted by the contingents from the neighboring Colonies, which had
assembled at Cambridge and Roxbury upon news being conveyed to them that
Massachusetts had accepted the gage of battle, who time after time
repelled the attacks of picked regiments of troops of Great Britain,
until compelled to leave the field by lack of ammunition upon the
seventeenth day of June, 1775. No better test of the mettle of the
American militiaman, when converted into a soldier, can be conceived
than was furnished upon that day when a number of these hastily
organized regiments met and shrank not from the attack of trained
soldiers. Although, naturally enough, regarded as a defeat, and,
therefore, in a measure discreditable to the provincials, so much so
that in after years veteran survivors cared not to exploit their
participation in the battle, it really had a tremendous moral effect
upon each side, the provincials being assured thereafter that under
anywhere near like equal conditions they could defeat the British, while
for the enemy there resulted the enforced conviction that the colonists
were not unworthy foes, and that like victory would be altogether too
dearly bought.

The encouragement offered to men to enlist into the eight months’
service would hardly be considered in the light of a very extravagant
bounty in these days. The Provincial Congress provided that a woollen
coat should be supplied to every soldier who enlisted, in addition to
his wages and travel allowance. These coats were to be provided by the
different towns throughout the Province; and a schedule was made up,
allotting a definite number to be furnished by each town. They were to
be of a uniform pattern, as far as the style of the coat was concerned;
but apparently the only distinctive military attachment in connection
with them was the buttons, which it was enacted should be of pewter and
bear the regimental number, when the coats were distributed to the men
belonging to the different organizations. It may well be imagined that
this method of securing coats did not result in very prompt delivery,
and in consequence it was provided later in the year that soldiers might
receive a money equivalent for the value of the coat. Inasmuch as many
of the men served the full term of their enlistment without ever being
gratified with the sight of the promised bounty coat, it is not to be
wondered at that thousands of them accepted the money equivalent, and
received it in some instances after the expiration of their term of
service. With the appointment of Washington as commander-in-chief by the
Continental Congress, the Massachusetts army, raised as I have
described, together with the levies raised by the other Colonies, became
a part of the Continental establishment. The eight months’ men raised by
Massachusetts can properly be regarded accordingly as Continental
soldiers, although originally raised under State auspices, without any
outside encouragement or assistance. The actual transfer of State
stores, supplies, etc., did not take place for some little time after
Washington had taken command at Cambridge; and many of the officers
exercised the duties of their positions under their State commissions,
and did not receive Continental commissions until September or October,
1775.

It may be interesting to note how the effective forces at Washington’s
disposition compared with the authorized number directed to be raised by
the Provincial Congress of Massachusetts. They had provided for an army
of 13,600 men; but on July 10, 1775, Washington expressed his concern at
finding the army inadequate to the general expectation and the duties
which might be required of it. In this communication he states that the
number of men fit for duty of the forces raised by the Province,
including all the outposts and artillery, did not amount to 9000. He
also states that the troops raised in the other Colonies were more
complete, although they also fell short of their establishment; and his
estimate at that time of the total number of men at his disposition
available for duty was not more than 13,500. The proportion, however, of
the troops furnished by the different Colonies, and composing the army
that invested Boston, is shown by a general return, signed by
Adjutant-General Horatio Gates in July, 1775. It gives twenty-six
Massachusetts regiments (an additional regiment not being completed is
not included in the number), four independent companies, also of
Massachusetts, with a regiment of artillery, three Connecticut
regiments, three New Hampshire regiments, three Rhode Island regiments,
and a Rhode Island company of artillery, making altogether a total force
of 17,355 men.

At a council of war, July 9, 1775, it was estimated that the force of
the enemy amounted to 11,500, and that the army investing Boston ought
to consist of at least 22,000 men; and it was recommended, in order to
supply the deficiency, that an officer from each company raised in
Massachusetts Bay should be sent out to recruit all the regiments up to
their standard efficiency as fixed by the Provincial Congress, Rhode
Island and Connecticut being at the time engaged in recruiting for the
purpose of filling up their quotas of troops to the full establishment.
Naturally enough, the commander-in-chief found much to lament over in
the deficiencies both as to number and equipment of the army he found
almost ready made to his hand, and yet so lacking in all things from a
military point of view; but there is little of criticism in his letters
of the period, although they are filled with pleadings, expostulations,
and exhortations for the purpose of bringing up the army to a desired
state of efficiency.

While the enlisted men comprising this eight months’ army held the line
and were being brought more or less under military discipline and
system, there were times when their numbers fell short of the estimated
number required for a besieging army, where it was at any time possible
that the enemy equal in effective force might make an attack and break
the line. It was found necessary from time to time to call forth the
local militia from the towns in the vicinity of Boston to do duty for
longer or shorter periods; but then, as later, the general officers
criticised the efficiency of the militia thus called upon, as they could
not be depended upon for a continuance in camp for any definite period,
or regularity and discipline during the time they might stay. Such
criticism was inevitable, and was applied during the whole term of the
Revolutionary War to the militia contingents that were called forth in
all the Colonies by the officers commanding the regulars or the
Continental forces.

After the expiration of the term of service of the eight months’ men a
call was made for twelve months’ men; and many of those who served the
first term or first campaign, as it was called, both officers and men,
engaged for the second campaign. The organization of the standing
militia thereby became broken up and disrupted by the depletion of the
local organizations. It therefore became necessary to make a
reorganization and redistricting of the militia of the Province. An act
was accordingly passed January 22, 1776, by which this object was
attained. It provided that all able-bodied male persons from sixteen
years of age to fifty, with certain specified exemptions, in every town
and district should be considered members of the train band. The alarm
list should consist of all male persons from sixteen years of age to
sixty-five, not liable to be included in the train band and not exempted
under special provision. Each company was to consist of sixty-eight
privates, exclusive of the alarm list, officered by a captain and two
lieutenants, non-commissioned officers to be four sergeants, four
corporals, with a drummer and fifer for each company. A
brigadier-general was directed to be chosen for each county, and under
him the field officers of the different regiments were authorized to
divide up and district the regiments, each regiment having a colonel,
lieutenant-colonel, and two majors. Three major-generals were also to be
chosen by the Council or House of Representatives. Under this enactment
the county regiments were numbered, officered, and their organizations
established, and from the standing militia thus provided for all
detachments and drafts of Massachusetts militia that were made, either
for short terms of service upon alarms or as re-enforcements to the
Continental Army, were made during the remaining period of the war. This
establishment for the militia continued in force until after the
adoption of the State Constitution in 1780.

  BOSTON.

                                                         JAMES J. TRACY.

    (Read before the Massachusetts Sons of American Revolution, 1904.)




                        A BIT OF CHURCH HISTORY


It is a subject of hope that someone—perhaps he is already cooing in his
cradle and smiling in response to the wondering faces that bend over
him—will be inspired to embody in imperishable epic, the adventurous
deeds of the Puritan and Pilgrim Fathers in the New World. He must be a
child of the Muses. He must have insight to sound the deeper currents of
human motive and action, the instinct for dramatic situations, a feeling
for the concrete in choice and act, and for the individual man. When
that epic appears some cantos of it will relate to the settlements of
the Connecticut valley, and among these old Windsor, to the ancient
church in which place this brief article relates.

We are fortunate in having a memoir of Captain Roger Clapp, a young man
of the company, written expressly for his own descendants, with glowing
religious purpose, but in more than one particular illuminating upon the
history and spirit of that early enterprise. Mr. Clapp’s own case is a
fine exhibition of the process of selection and unification by which a
party was made up of such as were fitted to undertake together the
peculiar task of making a new community in the wilderness. One would
readily guess that the relations of the individuals of such a company
must be somewhat other than those secured by formal agreements and
contracts on paper. They must be bound together by the finest of
affinities, by mutual esteem, by the strength of commanding leadership.
Add to this, of course, a rugged sense of the call and providence of
God. Something of this sort would be essential to business success, not
to say social happiness in the communal life of a new settlement; and if
what Mr. Clapp says of himself is at all representative, such was
actually the case. When a youth, evidently wishing to be
self-supporting, he asked leave of his father to live “abroad,” and went
to live on trial, three miles from Exeter (England). In his own
language: “We went every Lord’s-Day into the City, where were many
famous preachers of the Word of God. I then took such a liking unto the
Revd. Mr. John Warham, that I did desire to live near him: So I removed
(with my Father’s consent) into the city, and lived with one Mr.
Mossiour, as famous a Family for Religion as ever I knew; ... I never so
much as heard of New England until I heard of many godly Persons that
were going there, and that Mr. Warham was to go also.”

Through Mr. Clapp’s personal history we can see in his account of the
organization of the church, how here and there the preparatory process
had been going on in individual lives, and often unconsciously to
themselves men had been getting ready for this joint venture into the
New World. I give his account of the organization somewhat fully: “I
came out of Plymouth in Devon, the 20th of March, and arrived at
Nantasket the 30th of May 1630. Now this is further to inform you, that
there came _Many Godly Families_ in that ship: We were of Passengers
many in Number (besides Sea-men) of good Rank: Two of our Magistrates
come with us, viz., Mr. Rossiter and Mr. Ludlow. These godly People
resolved to live together; and therefore as they had made choice of
these two Revd. Servants of God, Mr. John Warham and Mr. John Maverick
to be their Ministers, so they kept a solemn Day of Fasting in the New
Hospital in Plymouth in England, spending it in Preaching and Praying:
where that worthy Man of God, Mr. John White of Dorchester in Dorset was
present, and Preached unto us the Word of God, in the forepart of the
Day, and in the latter part of the Day, as the People did solemnly make
choice of, and call those godly Ministers to be their Officers, so also
the Revd. Mr. Warham and Mr. Maverick did accept thereof, and expressed
the same. So we came, by the good Hand of the Lord, through the Deeps
comfortably; having Preaching or Expounding of the Word of God every Day
for Ten Weeks together, by our Ministers.”

This little Israel, which came over the waters, one hundred and forty
strong, in the good ship _Mary and John_, a craft of 400 tons, were
forced by Capt. Squeb, contrary to his agreement, to disembark in a
forlorn place on Nantasket Point. A place of settlement was soon
selected and named Dorchester. Attracted by the rich Connecticut
meadows, five years later Mr. Warham and the larger portion of his flock
made the difficult overland journey thither, and settled in the
beautiful region which was afterwards called Windsor by “order of the
court.” Thus the First Church of Christ in Windsor goes back beyond
Dorchester to Plymouth in Old England, and has had a continuous
existence from March 20, 1630, to the present as a Congregational Church
of what may be called, for lack of a better term, the orthodox or
Trinitarian variety—a fact that can be affirmed of no other
Congregational Church on the American Continent.

To speak of the members of this church and their numerous descendants,
would take us beyond the limits of this article. A few names will
suggest the significance of this body of Christians on the banks of the
Connecticut, in the life of the nation. Matthew Grant, the clerk of the
church and the town, whose fine records are now in the town clerk’s
office, was the ancestor of Gen. U. S. Grant and the numerous clans of
the Grant family in this country. The hero of Manila Bay is a descendant
of Thomas Dewey, of the old Windsor church. Henry Wolcott, a man of
wealth and social importance in old England, was the ancestor of the
famous Wolcott family, which included two Connecticut governors and men
of note in every generation to the present day. Roger Ludlow, the lawyer
of the settlement, gave legal shape to the democracy of Thomas Hooker in
the Constitution of Connecticut, the first written instrument of the
kind on record. Captain John Mason led the federated colonists to the
number of eighty men against the Pequots, and by no means least, Esther
Warham, the youngest daughter of the minister, a woman of rare charm and
remarkable gifts, was the mother of a mighty race, which has been
distinguished by many illustrious names, chief among whom must be named
her grandson, Jonathan Edwards. Two other men of national renown in
quite different directions are Chief Justice Oliver Ellsworth and Edward
Rowland Sill. Ellsworth was born in Windsor, lived here practically his
whole life save, of course, when he was away on public business, and his
home still remains, now the property of the Connecticut Society of the
D. A. R. He was a devoted member of the church and chairman of the
building committee in charge of the erection of the new house of worship
in 1794, which still remains in excellent condition. The book
containing, among many others, Mr. Ellsworth’s subscription of 100
pounds, with that for like amounts by Dr. Chaffee and Jerijah Barber, is
in possession of the present treasurer. Edward Rowland Sill, the rare
quality of whose poetic genius has won increasing recognition ever since
his early death, was a descendant of Rev. David Rowland, one of the old
Windsor pastors, and was, by immediate family connections as well as the
associations of his own boyhood, a child of the Windsor church, though
he spent the larger part of his mature life elsewhere.

                                                          ROSCOE NELSON.

  WINDSOR, CONN.

[Illustration:

  CORNER OF SAULT AU MATELOT AND ST. JAMES STREETS.

  Tablet placed by the Literary and Historical Society of Quebec, 1904.
  (The second barricade was across Sous Le Cap Street, behind where
    figure stands.)
]




                    ARNOLD AND MONTGOMERY AT QUEBEC


The last day of December, 1904, was the 128th anniversary of the
unsuccessful attack on Quebec in 1775, and by a coincidence on almost
that very day the Literary and Historical Society of Quebec erected two
bronze tablets to commemorate the event. We are indebted to Mr. F. C.
Würtele, the Secretary of the Society, for the photographs from which
our two illustrations are made—they thus appearing in our pages in
advance even of Canadian journals.

From the newspaper accounts furnished us, we condense:

When the Canadian Government erected monuments on the battlefields of
1812, the invasion of 1775 seemed to have been forgotten, and no
memorials were placed in Quebec to commemorate the signal defeat of the
Continental invaders on the 31st of December, 1775, at the hands of
General Guy Carleton, the savior of Canada to the British Crown.

However, that brave defence has not been forgotten by Quebec’s citizens,
and some time ago at a meeting of the Literary and Historical Society of
Quebec, it was resolved, “That the time has come for the erection of
historic tablets at Pres-de-Ville and the Sault-au-Matelot, in the lower
town of Quebec, relating to the events of 31st of December, 1775, so
important to the destiny of Canada; and as it is within the province of
the Literary and Historical Society of Quebec to erect such memorials, a
committee is hereby appointed on the subject.”

As such memorials would be battlefield monuments, the Federal Government
was petitioned by the society for means to erect suitable historic
tablets at these places. The request was graciously responded to and
splendid memorials in statuary bronze have been erected, one bolted to
the rock where at its base Montgomery was defeated and killed, and the
other on the St. James street gable of the Molsons Bank, as near as
possible to the site of the Sault-au-Matelot barricade, where Arnold was
defeated, and over 400 of his men made prisoners, both events taking
place in the early morning of that memorable last day of December, 1775.
As these bronzes have been placed in position for the anniversary of
that event, a short historic retrospect may be interesting:

One hundred and twenty-nine years have passed since a force under
Montgomery was sent by Lake Champlain to attack Montreal, and another
under Arnold marched from Cambridge, Mass., via the Voyageur trail up
the Kennebec river and across to the source of the river Chaudiere, to
St. Marie and thence by road to Levis opposite Quebec, where, after
considerable hardships throughout the whole journey it arrived, and
crossing the St. Lawrence appeared on the present Cove Fields, on the
14th, was fired on and soon retired to Pointe aux Trembles, where the
arrival of Montgomery from Montreal was waited.

Montgomery carried all before him, taking Sorel, Montreal and Three
Rivers. General Carleton, who was in Montreal, knowing the importance of
Quebec, and that for divers reasons Montreal could not then be defended,
destroyed the government stores and arrived at Quebec on the 19th of
November, where Colonel MacLean, who had preceded him, was preparing for
its defence.

The defences were strengthened and barricades erected and armed in the
Lower Town, in Sault-au-Matelot street, and the present Sous-le-Cap,
also at Pres-de-Ville, where is now the Allan Steamship Company’s
property.

Montgomery arrived on the 1st of December with his army, and Arnold’s
800 raised the attacking force to 2000 men, who proceeded to take
possession of St. Roch’s and erected batteries on the high ground,
Montgomery issued general orders on the 15th December, which were sent
into the town, and a copy is now to be found in the Dominion Archives at
Ottawa:

  (Q. 12. PAGE 30.)

  HEADQUARTERS HOLLAND HOUSE, NEAR QUEBEC.

                                                  _15th December, 1775._

                                                  Countersign—_Adams_.

  Parole—_Connecticut_.

  The General having in vain offered the most favorable terms of
  accommodation to the Governor and having taken every possible step to
  prevail on the inhabitants to desist from seconding him in his wild
  scheme of defence, nothing remains but to pursue vigorous measures for
  the speedy reduction of the only hold possessed by the Ministerial
  troops in the Province. The troops flushed with continual success,
  confident of the justice of their cause and relying on that Providence
  which has uniformly protected them will advance to the attack of works
  incapable of being defended by the wretched garrison posted behind
  them, consisting of sailors unacquainted with the use of arms, of
  citizens incapable of the soldier’s duty and a few miserable
  emigrants. The General is confident a vigorous and spirited attack
  must be attended with success. The troops shall have the effects of
  the Governor, garrison, and of such as have been acting in misleading
  the inhabitants and distressing the friends of liberty, to be equally
  divided among them, each to have the one hundredth share out of the
  whole, which shall be at the disposal of the General and given to such
  soldiers as distinguished themselves by their activity and bravery,
  and sold at public auction. The whole to be conducted as soon as the
  city is in our hands and the inhabitants disarmed.

  The General at Headquarters,

                                                 FERD. WEISENFELS,
                                                     _Major of Brigade_.

The division which was to attack Pres-de-Ville assembled at 2 o’clock A.
M. of the 31st December, at Montgomery’s headquarters, Holland House
(now the property of Frank Ross, Esq.), and headed by Montgomery,
marched across the Plains of Abraham and descended into the beach path,
now Champlain street. Those who were to make the attack by the suburbs
of St. Roch, headed by Arnold, were about 800 strong. The plan was that
Montgomery and Arnold were to meet at the foot of Mountain Hill and
storm the Upper Town.

A heavy northeast snowstorm was raging at 4 o’clock that dark morning
when Montgomery had descended the cliff and advanced along the narrow
beach path, a ledge flanked to the left by the perpendicular cliffs of
Cape Diamond and to the right by a precipitous descent at whose base
flowed the tide of the St. Lawrence.

The Pres-de-Ville barricade and the blockhouse at the narrowest part of
the road was defended by Captain Chabot, Lieut. Picard, 30 Canadian
militiamen, Captain Barnesfare and 15 seamen, Sergeant Hugh McQuarters,
of the Royal Artillery, with several small guns, and Mr. John Coffin, 50
in all. The garrison was alert and saw the head of the column approach
and halt some fifty yards from the barricade, when a man approached to
reconnoitre, and on his return the column continued its advance, when it
was fired on by cannon and musketry, whose first discharge killed
Montgomery, his aides Macpherson and Cheeseman, and 10 men. Thereupon
the rest of the 700 men turned and fled, pursued by the bullets of the
Canadians till there was nothing more to fire at. None behind the
leading sections knew what happened, and the slain, left as they fell,
were buried by the drifting snow, whence their frozen bodies were dug
out later in the day.

Arnold’s column carried the barricade across Sous-le-Cap street,
situated beneath the Half-Moon battery, and were stopped at the second
barricade at the end of that narrow street (quite close to where is now
Molsons Bank), defended by Major Nairne, Dambourges and others, who held
them in check until Captain Laws’ strong party, coming from Palace Gate,
took them in rear and caused their surrender, 427 in all, thus
completing the victory of that morning. Arnold was put out of action
early in the fight by a ball[1] from the ramparts near Palace Gate, when
passing with the leading sections, and was carried to the General
Hospital.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The late Governor-General, Lord Minto, took great interest in the
tablets, and approved of the inscriptions which were submitted for his
consideration.

These tablets, in shield form, are of statuary bronze, with the
lettering cast in relief.

The large one on the rock under Cape Diamond measures six feet three
inches by five feet nine inches, and is thus inscribed:

                              _Here Stood
                          The Undaunted Fifty
                              Safeguarding
                                 Canada
                          Defeating Montgomery
                     At the Pres-de-Ville Barricade
                           On the Last Day of
                                  1775
                              Guy Carleton
                             Commanding at
                                Quebec_

That on Molsons Bank measures two feet ten inches by two feet six
inches, and its legend relates:

                              _Here Stood
                       Her Old and New Defenders
                       Uniting, Guarding, Saving
                                 Canada
                            Defeating Arnold
                   At the Sault-au-Matelot Barricade
                           On the Last Day of
                                  1775
                              Guy Carleton
                             Commanding at
                                Quebec_

[Illustration: [Fleuron]]




                A “SCRUB-POETICAL” ANSWER TO A GOVERNOR


His Excellency Jonathan Belcher, governor of His Majesty’s provinces of
Massachusetts and New Hampshire, must have many times realized what a
very difficult and disagreeable task it is to drive an ill-matched team,
especially when one of them is to all appearances possessed of the Evil
One, and the pole is loose and not to be depended on. Such a team the
governor had in his two provinces, and he was a very busy man.

Massachusetts kept well in the traces and gave him comparatively little
trouble. He lived in Boston, and was thus able to maintain a more
intimate knowledge of the people of that State and the trend of public
opinion than was possible to do in respect to more distant New
Hampshire, where he was relatively a stranger. Though not popular as a
man or as a Crown official, his personal presence in Massachusetts as
governor, with the miniature court, the sumptuous appointments, and the
dignity which accompanied the King’s commission, necessarily had some
effect in steadying the progress of government there.

But in New Hampshire he had many serious problems. A small province both
in population and resources, it had for many years stood between
Massachusetts and the savages, who were continually hovering about the
frontiers, and in this almost constant warfare, and by the costly
vigilance which was necessary even in times of nominal peace, the
province had incurred debts which were a heavy burden on the sparse
population. During the time in which New Hampshire was considered by the
Crown not of sufficient size, wealth, and importance to maintain a
governor of its own, and accordingly yoked with Massachusetts, the power
of granting townships in New Hampshire was, of course, vested in the
governor, and exercised by him under the same royal instructions as in
Massachusetts. The plans and purposes of the government in locating
these grants in New Hampshire are easily seen by their peculiar but
systematic location. They were largely laid out in lines, each line of
towns answering a specific purpose. One line followed the Merrimack
river, Amherst, Bedford, and Goffstown, guarding the west bank of the
main inland waterway of the two provinces. Another line, Concord,
Hopkinton, Henniker, Hillsborough, Warner, and Bradford, formed a
northern frontier, and connected the Merrimack with Washington and
Lempster the most northerly of another line, the Monadnock townships,
which, nine in number, established a perfect connection back to the
Massachusetts line. Still another line, Chesterfield, Westmoreland,
Walpole, and Charlestown, guarded the east bank of the Connecticut. All
these established and maintained a protection for the whole of central
Massachusetts against any incursions of the Indians from the north, and
enclosed large tracts of very valuable land.

The burden of the taxation necessary to pay the expenses of Indian
warfare and maintain the government rested heavily on the people of New
Hampshire, while they were engaged in conflict with the wilderness,
planting the standard of civilization step by step further north and
west. Therefore, when the governor in his recurring messages constantly
besought the Assembly to raise money—to supply funds for repairing Fort
William and Mary, for building a new prison or repairing the old one,
for the expenses of carrying on the boundary line controversy with
Massachusetts—he did not always meet with a cordial reception or a
courteous reply. Money for current expenses and paying old obligations
as fast as possible the Assembly was willing to provide, but little was
to be had for other purposes which did not appear to its members
absolutely and urgently necessary.

A strong opposition to the administration sprang up in New Hampshire,
and manifested itself in an intrigue to procure the governor’s recall.
The opposition was headed by Lieutenant-Governor Dunbar, a pugnacious
Irishman, and Theodore Atkinson and Benning Wentworth, who had been
appointed councillors through the efforts of Dunbar, but whose admission
to the council board Governor Belcher prevented for two years. It was a
strong combination. Dunbar was not possessed of great influence with the
home government aside from that which pertained to his office, but
Wentworth and Atkinson had powerful friends and connections in England,
who were not slow to take advantage of Governor Belcher’s increasing
unpopularity both in America and England. So successful were they, that
when, in 1741, the royal decision on the boundary line was carried into
effect, and New Hampshire finally freed from union with Massachusetts,
Wentworth was commissioned governor of the province and Atkinson became
secretary of the council, equivalent to the present office of secretary
of state.

Governor Belcher was not, however, without friends in New Hampshire, and
the chief of these, perhaps, was Richard Waldron, then secretary of the
council. They were intimate friends, both officially and personally, and
maintained a lively correspondence. Entirely different in character and
disposition, the oddities of each attracted and amused the other. The
governor’s peppery temper gave Waldron many a chance for a jest or a
clever and good-natured retort. But his friends were too few, and the
opposition too strong, and the settlement of the long-disputed boundary
line gave the home government an opportunity too attractive to be lost
for reestablishing the governments of the two provinces on a basis of
complete separation, intended to result in a lasting peace, and the
relief of the Board of Trade and Plantations from continual complaints
and the burden of discussion and decision of what, to them, were but
petty provincial squabbles.

This was, in brief, the general atmosphere of the provinces when
Governor Belcher went to New Hampshire to meet the Assembly in the
winter of 1733–4, and there delivered his regular speech and scolded on
his regular subjects. That he was not considered seriously by all the
inhabitants was not due to any lack of earnestness on his part. The
author of the poetical reply has not yet been ascertained. Suspicion,
however, points to Richard Waldron. The handwriting resembles his, but
cannot be certainly identified.

During the first century of the life of the province no family was more
prominent or carried a larger influence in the public affairs of New
Hampshire than the Waldrons. Whatever may be said of peculiar
characteristics which were displayed by some members of the family, the
early Waldrons were, as a rule, strong, hard-headed pioneers, the type
of men most needed in subduing a hostile wilderness. Later generations
became wealthy, and wealth brought to them education and refinement, as
brains brought distinction, both civil and military.

Secretary Richard Waldron, whom we assume to be the author of the reply
to Governor Belcher’s message, was the son of Richard, and grandson of
Major Richard, who was killed by the Indians at Dover in 1689, and was
born Feb. 21, 1693–4. He was graduated from Harvard in 1712, and soon
removed from Dover to Portsmouth. He was a member of the Governor’s
council, Secretary of the province, and Judge of Probate. It is to the
burning of his house in 1736 that we may charge a considerable loss of
the early New Hampshire archives and records, and the breaks in the
records which were thus created are serious obstacles to the historian
of the present day.

The friendship of Governor Belcher kept Waldron in his office of
Secretary until the end of the Belcher administration, but Governor
Wentworth suspended him from the council, and removed him from the
offices of Secretary and Judge of Probate. In 1749 he was elected
Speaker of the House, which the Governor refused to allow, and a
controversy was created which lasted three years. He died soon after,
August 23, 1753.

The original manuscript of his “Scrub Poetry” is on file with the
Governors’ messages in the archives in the office of the Secretary of
State at Concord, N. H.

On the second day of January, 1733–4, the governor thus addressed the
Council and House of Representatives:

  Gen^t of the Council & House of Representatives.

  By the last ships from London I have received an account of the French
  King’s Declaring War against the Empe^r of Germany with whome his
  Brittanick Maj^{tie} is in alliance & how far this unhappy Rupture may
  lead to a Gen^{ll} War in Europe is uncertaine, however I think it a
  faire Alarm to all his Maj^{ties} Dominions to put themselves in a
  Posture of defence & you cannot but be sensible how naked & Exposed
  this Province is both by Sea and Land. Fort William & Mary at the
  Entrance of this River (the only Fortifications his Maj^{tie} has in
  this Province) you know Lyes in a miserable condition nor are you
  ignorant how often I have prest the Repaire of this Fortress upon the
  Assembly here altho it has forty Guns yet it has for a long time had
  only a Capt a Gunner and two Centinels belonging to it. I hope your
  own Safety as well as his Maj^{ties} Hon^r (at this Critical juncture)
  will put you upon doing what is absolutely necessary in this Important
  affaire.

  I have Gen^t frequent Complaints of the ruinous condition of the Gaole
  of the Province which will Require a large Repaire or Rather
  Rebuilding as soone as may be their being Continual Hazards of Escapes
  thro’ its present Deficiency.

  Gen^t of the House of Representative.

  you very well know there has been no money in the Treasury of the
  Province for neare three years past which has greatly Exposed and
  dishon^d the Kings Goverm^t and has been a Publick Injustice &
  oppression—this with the threatening Aspect abroad (I have no doubt)
  will lead you to make Ample Provision for what I have now mentioned as
  well as for all the other Exigencies of the Goverm^t.

  Gen^t of the Council, & House of Representatives.

  Upon my meeting of the Ass^m of the Mass^{ts} Bay in April last I
  earnestly recommended to them the passing an Order (agreeable to what
  had been done in this Province) for putting a stop (at present) to any
  process in the Law ag^t the Borderers on the disputed Lines of the two
  Provinces. But the Publick Prints have long Since told you it had not
  the desired Success.

  In January Last, I wrote verry fully to the Right Hon^{ble} the Lords
  of Trade praying them to Represent this long unhappy Dispute to his
  Maj^{tie} that there might be an End put to the Contention to which
  letter I have rec^d the Hon^r of their Lordships Answer, Saying they
  hope upon the return of my answer to their Letter no further delay may
  be occasioned to the accomplishing a matter of so much advantage to
  both Provinces and my answer to their Lordships Letter is Long Since
  gone forward and I shall rejoyce in Seeing this troublesome affaire
  bro^t to a happy conclusion.

  Gen^t In whatsoever you can project for his Maj^{ties} Hon^r & Service
  and for the Prosperity of his good Subjects in this Province you Shall
  have my hearty assistance and Consent.

  Jan^r 1^t 1733–4.

                                                             J. BELCHER.

The reply in rhyme is found to follow very closely the official and more
dignified document which was presented to the Governor, and is probably
a versification of the prose message done for the amusement of the
writer only, and never intended for the Governor’s ear. It is endorsed
“Ans^r to y^e Gov^{rs} Speech Jan^y 1733–4. Scrub Poetry.”


                           PUNCH TO SHEARBACK

              Good Sir, what fatall Dreadful things
              The proclamation of French King’s
              War ’gainst Emperour of Germany
              May bring upon this new Country!
              And Else how far it may effect
              Tranquility of Europe great,
              Approaching time must only speak.
              But, Sir, great Britain, wee do hope
              And other powers of Europe,
              By prudent Mediation, may
              Divert unto another day
              Th’ alarming noise of cruell War,
              With which wee so frightened are,
              And then conclude a happy peace,
              That war & war’s alarms may cease.
              And this wee do believe full well,
              Because, Great Sir, you did not tell
              In Speech to us you lately made
              The advise came from Board of Trade.
              For surely wee do apprehend
              That they would forward to us send
              There timely wise Direction,
              If of war they had Conception.[2]
              If with such sums wee should Supply
              The present wants of Treasury,
              As wee do Judge Sufficient are,
              The Walls & Towers to repair
              Of Old Fort William and Mary,
              And to pay poor Jos. & Harry;
              If wee the Prison should rebuild,
              Our promises not yet fulfill’d,
              Together with the gen’rall Tax
              Already laid by sev’ral Acts
              For repaying and for drownding,
              For Sinking & for Confounding
              Money borrowed heretofore,
              When Indians bad in Days of yore,
              Like Dastard sons of Swarthy whore,
              Proclaim’d a sad Unnatural War;
              These things (if wee are right) wee Count,
              To Sums so large would sure amount,
              As Constable would not be able,
              On Poles[3] & ’states (O Lamentable)
              Of Subjects good of Majesty,
              To gather in a Subsidy.
              And such an Act would surely be
              A great and sore Calamity,
              And war itself by far outvye.
              Which, should this house be Instrumental in,
              It would not only much dishonour King,
              But of Oppression be a peice,
              And savour much of Injustice;
              And wee presume you well do know
              Peices this House are strangers to.
              And to prevent such Imputations,
              Wee once did, in December Sessions,[4]
              An act pass for the Emitting
              Pounds Six thousand paper bills in,
              To repair William and Mary,
              Treasury also to supply,
              Which did both houses pass, ’tis said,
              With the act which Courts Removed
              From Portsmouth, O Unhappy Mischance!
              To Towns from us a greater Distance.
              And to say truth, O strange mistake!
              Wee thought one Common happy fate
              Would both these Laws attend,
              And money stand poor Portsmouth Friend.
              But your Excellence approved
              That the Courts should be removed,
              And the poor Ready money Act
              Was into Breeches pocket clapt
              Till pleasure of his Majesty
              Be known to your Excellency,
              Since which three Years are gon & past,
              And yet this Act doth hang an Arse.

              This House hath also often, too,
              Made Estimate exact & true
              Of province Debts, as well as Creditt,
              (And being in debt have never paid it).
              Into the Treasury wee voted
              That what was due should be transported,
              For to pay of the claims of Many,
              Tho’ wee design’d not to pay any;
              Which being sent down Non concur’d,
              A written Message did Afford,
              (And by the way a strange one, too).

[An explanation here seems necessary, beyond the possibilities of a
foot-note.

March 6, 1732–3, the House passed a bill for emitting £20,000 in paper
money. The province was much in debt on account of Indian warfare,
repairing and maintaining fortifications, etc., and provision for
payment of this debt had been made by heavy taxes to continue annually
until 1742. But money was very scarce, and the House considered that the
people would be unable to pay the taxes laid upon them for the want of a
proper medium. Therefore this £20,000 was to be placed in the hands of a
committee, to be loaned to the people at 5% interest for sixteen years,
and the principal of each loan was to be paid at the rate of 25% each
year for the four years next following the term of sixteen years for
which the loan was made. And for the supply of the treasury for the time
before the first interest payment was due, a further sum of £1,000 was
to be issued. The council, however, was unanimous in refusing to concur
with the House on this bill.

The House attempted to bring about a compromise by reducing the loan
term to eight years and by other changes in the original bill, but was
not successful, the Governor claiming that the approval of such a bill
would be contrary to his instructions.

Finally, March 9, the House addressed a message to the Governor, in
which the council is charged with saying that the House had nothing to
do with the matter of issuing money; and the House further defends its
action and position thus: “Now this House thinks they have and ought to
have a vote in the disposall of all Publick money and that the Board
were formerly of this opinion appears by their Sending down Mr.
Atkinson’s account to be past upon in the last Sessions. So that, that
money is Still unapplyed notwithstanding the Said Atkinson hath declared
his readiness to pay the Same. So that the House can See no other way of
Supplying the Treasury without oppressing the People whome we Represent
than what they have come into. Wherefore this House are humbly of
opinion that it will greatly tend to the Prosperity and welfare of his
Maj^{ties} Subjects of this Province to address his Maj^{tie} by the
hand of our agent to obtaine his Royall leave for a further Emission of
Paper Currency more Especially Since your Excell^y has informed this
House that you cant consent to. It being contrary to his Maj^{ties}
Royal Instruction to your Excell^y and if the Hon^{ble} Council Should
think proper to appoint a com’ittee to Joyne with a Com’ittee of this
House for the Ends aforesaid we are humbly of Opinion it would be
attended with the desired effect.”

The next day, March 10, the council sent down a sharp and angry reply,
as follows:

“Whereas in a Mess^a from the Hon^{ble} House to his Excellency the
forenoon bearing date the 9th Curr^t & Sent up this day and communicated
to the Council There are Sundry things mentioned which Seem to cast an
Odium on the Council as tho it lay at their door that there is not a due
Supply of the Treasury to which the Council in justice to themselves are
oblidged to Say that the reason of their non-concurrence to the 20000£
Bills on Loan was (as the House has been Heretofore once and againe
Informed) because the Emission of Bills on Loan is directly contrary to
his Maj^{tie} Royal Instructions And as to the thousand pounds Mentioned
for the im’ediate Supply of the Treasury it was couched in the Twenty
thousand pound Bills from whence tis plaine that the House never
intended one Should pass without the other but that if the thousand
pounds for the Supply of the Treasury would not tempt the Council to
break this the Kings Instruction their complyance with the Kings
Instruction Should defeat the Supply of the Treasury but if they had a
Sincere disposition to Supply the Treasury as they pretended and Sent up
a Bill for the Same they would have soon seen the heartiness of the
Council in doing their Duty to his Maj^{tie} and the utmost Justice to
this Province by the rediest concurrence as to the Interest of the 1730£
the Council have been long Endeavouring that that Loan Might by some
means or other be beneficial to the Publick Tho to their great grief by
the disappointment of their attempts in the Honb^{ble} House Private
psons have enjoyed the benefit of that money at 2½ p Ct when there have
been many that would gladly have given more than double yea treble for
the same if they might have been favoured with it and the Council have
this day Sent down a vote for the Setting that Loan at 6 p C^t for 2
years instead of 2½ p Ct in order to Ease the Tax of the Province which
has at last Succeeded as to the Money in Mr. Atkinsons hands which he
recd of Hughs’s Estate long agoe and which ought for Several years past
to have been in the Treasury the Council presume his Excell^y will take
a due Care that that £292 Ball^{ce} Settled under his hands be paid by a
Course of Law Since there is no prospect of its being done without it
even after So much indulgence to him who has been So notoriously
delinquent to the vast dishon^r of the Goverm^t & unspeakable oppression
of Sundry poor distressed Creatures to whome the Province is indebted—as
to the Houses Saying they ought to have a vote in the Disposal of the
Publick Money the Council Reply when they the Council think proper to
deny that Point in Politicks it will be time En^o for them to form an
argum^t against it but that is not yet got unto the Question for saying
the House of Representatives have nothing to do with a Confiscation or a
forfeiture to his Maj^{tie} by a Judgm^t in Court Is not Saying the
House have nothing to do with the disposal of Publick Money unless it
[is] So by some Logick in the House w^{ch} the Council have not
Learn’d—As to Mr. Atkinsons declaration of his readiness to pay the
Money in his hands what is there in it did he not declare heretofore
even in the House and most Solemnly at the Council Board too that he
would pay part of his Debt at Such a time and the Residue in a Short
Space after & are not the terms long Since Expired But are the paym^{ts}
made let the Treasurers accounts answer which Say no not one penny why
then Gen^t Should you trouble your Selves in making Such a mess^a &
boasting of Such declarations the Council might further verry well
observe too that the Scheme of the House for an audit to be appointed by
the Gen^{ll} Court to Examine a Sheriffs Return of an Execution is
intirely new however is a full Evidence that the House have been much
bent on trifling as to what the House propose of the Councils Joyning
with them in addressing his majesty by the hand of our our agent as they
express it) &c the Council Say they know of no Person So qualified But
if the House mean Cap^t John Rindge, Marriner then they answer That when
it appears to them that his Capacity & other Quallifications are Equal
to Such a Trust & he is hon^d with a Comiss^n for that place the Council
will readyly do w^t is proper on those heads.”]

            They say the House had nought to do
            With money to the province due,
            And by which means that Money
            Still is out of Treasury,
            As also is the Interest
            (As some do say who know it best)
            Of pounds more than seventeen hundred,
            And is not this much to be wondred,
            Which the verry last assembly
            Voted into the Treasury.
            And if any wicked elf
            Refused, for the sake of pelf,
            To pay the Interest then due,
            Also his Bonds for to renew,
            Then Speaker he the Bonds must see,
            And Borrower to Hampton send,
            His Destiny there to attend.
            Butt, Oh! when Mortals most are pleas’d,
            How Subject are they to be Teaz’d!
            The house disolv’d,[5] the Speakers gone,
            And none the Affair can carry on,
            Which to the province, and to us,
            Has been occasion of much loss.
            And this wee hope will imputation
            Of Injustice or Oppression
            Take from a Guilty Generation,
            And so Confirm the good Opinion
            You express’d towards us whilome,
            By saying that wee always acted
            What a good and gracious King expected,
            A Charracter wee always merritted,
            And so shall never be Dispirritted.
            Wee think it then our Duty is
            His Majesty for to address,
            That wee may Cash sometimes Emitt,
            (You know ’tis Money that buys wit),
            Upon this province’s Credit.
            And so wee hope for the Concurrence
            Of the Council & Your Excellence.

            Of the house you do receive the Thanks
            For telling of the Circumstance
            Of Borderers on line distressed,[6]
            And staying process ’gainst th’ Oppressed,
            Unto your other Government,
            Tho’ what you said had no Effect.

            Some of these towns, being offended,
            Money at Law have much expended.
            And is not this a Dismal sound?
            Some say ’tis full a thousand pound,
            Besides there time and loss of Ground.
            But this, by what in yours you said,
            And the Success our agent[7] had,
            When at great Britain he resided,
            Gives hopes that soon ’twill be decided.
            For Copy, wee do Understand,
            Of Memoriall from the Land.

            From King and Council hath been sent
            To Massachusetts Government
            For answer, (if wee right remember),
            By the first day of Last November.
            After which wee dare boldly say
            Wee hope there will be no Delay.

            Wee beg leave to tell you next,
            That wee are met with good pretext,
            Such things Determined to act
            As C——k May in our Noddles pack;
            Which wee conceive was the Intent
            Of those whom we do represent—
                                            OTIS G. HAMMOND.

  CONCORD, N. H.




      HAS GOVERNOR LOVELACE OF NEW YORK BEEN PROPERLY IDENTIFIED?


I am not sufficiently acquainted with the details of historical
investigation in New York to know whether there has ever been any doubt
as to the identity (or rather the family) of Governor Lovelace; but I
presume that the Dictionary of National Biography gives the generally
accepted account when it states that he was the second son of Richard,
first Baron Lovelace.

Recently the examination of some old documents has led me to the belief
that the Governor of New York was of a much more distinguished kinship
than that which has been usually assigned to him. To most of us the
Lords Lovelace are only known by a passing reference in Macaulay; but
the author of the two songs to Althea and Lucasta is one of the
immortals.

In a volume in the Congressional Library, which was bought from
President Jefferson and which contains copies of miscellaneous
historical records relating to Virginia, are two documents signed by
Francis Lovelace, Governor of New York.

The first of these is a letter evidently written to Governor Berkeley of
Virginia. It is as follows:

  “DEARE SIR:

  Since my last to you sent by M^r Machen in answere to yo^{rs} I
  received a letter from Mr. Tho: Todd of Mockjack bay who being
  appointed Guardian to the will Whitbey’s son by my neece M^{rs} Ruth
  Gorsuch he having hitherto taken great care and paines in the
  adjusting his interest in severall plantations being devolve to him by
  the death of his father M^r Tod desired me to signify to you that this
  lad I have brought over is the recitable child, and heare to M^r
  Whitby w^ch by these I declare to be soe and if you be satisfyed
  w^{th} this relacon w^ch I assure you upon the faith of a Xtian and
  Honor of a gentleman you may rest assured of it but if the Ceremony of
  an oath be requisite, I shalbe ready (if desired as necessary) to make
  my Deposicon of it, and I shall furt^r desire of you that when an
  application is made to you in his behalfe you would affourd him what
  favo^r and Countenance the Justness of his Cause & p^rtentions will
  beare he is now an orphant & I have been at considerable charge both
  to his transport education & clothing expecting noe other retorne but
  when he is in a capacity to make it onely to reimburse me with what I
  have expended for him, S^r I know his cause is safe in yo^r hands to
  whome I must refer him & the experience all that know you have of yo^r
  Justice & Compan * * [?] in p’tecting the fatherles shalbe argum^{ts}
  sufficient that I shall not miscarry in these my desires for him in
  gratitude of w^{ch} I can pay noe other returne but if you please to
  prepare any service for me you shall find me most ready to obey it
  when you reflect upon what I subscribe w^{ch} is

  Yo^r most assured fathfull serv^t

                                                         FRAN: LOVELACE.

  From y^e Barbadoes I hear yo^r Bro: Ld Berkeley is designed to be
  Governor but the truth I refer to your Consideracon. M^r Winthrop
  Newley sent me This newes w^{ch} here inclosed will kisse yo^r hands
  adue

           Jeames ffort 6^{th} Decemb^r
               1669      Rec^r p. RICH. AWBORNE
                                           Jan: ye 7^{th} 1668”

Richard Awborne was clerk of the Virginia Council, and this letter was
evidently recorded for young Whitby’s benefit.

  The other paper is entitled “Resolutions for the settlem^t of Comerce
  to and from all his Maj^{ties} Plantations in America, and other
  places to the port of New York & the rest of his Royall Highnes his
  Territoryes not p’hibited by act of Parliam^t” and concludes “Given
  und^r my hand at ffort James in New York on Manhatans Island the
  18^{th} day of November 1668

                                                         FRAN: LOVELACE”

This also had been copied into the Virginia records and attested by
Awborne.

In the present discussion this last paper is valuable as proving that
the writer of the letter to Berkeley was certainly Governor Lovelace of
New York.

The chain of evidence which appears to contradict the commonly accepted
statement in regard to Governor Lovelace’s family begins with the
pedigree of a family of Gorsuch in the Visitation of London, 1633–4.
(Harleian Society, p. 327.) In this pedigree it is stated that John
Gorsuch, rector of Walkhome, Hertfordshire, 1633, married Anne, daughter
of Sir William Lovelace, of Kent, Knight, and had the following children
at the time of the visitation: 1. Daniel “about 4a^o 1633”; 2. John; 3.
William; 4. Cathrin.

On April 1st, 1657, Richard, Robert and Charles Gorsuch, sons and
co-heirs of John Gorsuch, “P’fessor in Divinity,” petitioned the Court
of Lancaster County, Va., that their sister Katherine Whitby might be
their guardian for “such estate as doth in any ways belong to them in
England,” and that Francis Moryson [afterwards governor of Virginia] be
their guardian for Virginia. Shortly afterwards all of these boys
removed to the Eastern Shore of Maryland. The records of that colony not
only make notice of them, but also show that they had another brother
Lovelace Gorsuch, and a sister Anne, who married Thomas Todd, of
Mockjack (now Mobjack) Bay, Gloucester County, Va.

The Quaker records of West River, Maryland, contain the records of the
marriage, in 1690, of Charles Gorsuch, “son of John and Anne Gorsuch, of
the Kingdom of England, deceased,” and Anne Hawkins. In 1669, Charles
and Lovelace Gorsuch confirmed title to certain land which had been
granted to Lovelace Gorsuch in 1661. On Jan. 13, 1676–7, Mrs. Anne Todd
made a deed to her children and appointed her brother, Chas. Gorsuch,
trustee. It seems certain that that John Gorsuch, the “P’fessor in
Divinity,” was identical with Rev. John Gorsuch of Walkhome, who married
Anne, daughter of Sir William Lovelace, of Kent, and that one of his
daughters, Ruth, married William Whitby, of Virginia, while another,
Anne, married Thomas Todd, of the same colony. This explains at once why
Thomas Todd was appointed, as stated by Governor Lovelace, guardian to
William Whitby, Jr. Young Whitby was the nephew of Todd’s wife.

When these facts are made clear the rest of the identification of
Governor Lovelace seems easy. Sir William Lovelace, of Kent, the father
of Mrs. Anne Gorsuch, was also the father of Richard Lovelace, the poet.
The other sons of Sir William were “Col. Francis” (of “Lucasta”), Thomas
and Dudley. The Dictionary of National Biography only knows of Col.
Francis Lovelace, that he served the Royalist Cause in Wales and
commanded Caermarthen from June, 1664, until it was captured by
Langhorne in October, 1645. From Governor Lovelace’s friendship with
Berkeley it seems very probable that it was indeed he (and not the son
of Lord Lovelace as stated in the D. N. B.) who received license from
the Council in 1650 to go to Virginia, and who in May, 1652, was sent by
Berkeley to inform Charles II. of the surrender of Virginia to the
Parliamentary forces.

Francis Lovelace and the members of the Gorsuch family evidently came in
the large royalist emigration to Virginia during the Civil War.

In conclusion it may be worth while to trace Governor Lovelace’s kinsman
and protégé, William Whitby.

William Whitby, the elder, the husband of Ruth Gorsuch, lived in Warwick
County, Va., and was Speaker of the House of Burgesses in 1653. He
received two considerable grants of land, one in Warwick, where he
lived, and another on Potomac Creek.

The son resided in Middlesex County, Va., and appears to have led an
uneventful life, and to have died unmarried. His will, as that of
“William Whitby, of Pyanketank River in the County of Middlesex,
planter,” was dated July, 1676, and proved July 23, 1677. He gave “to
Major Robert Beverley £100, Mrs. Mary Kibble [Keeble] £100, and my
brother, Joseph Summers £200, all out of a rent due me out of Kent in
England”; John Cocking to have 700 acres, and John Wright 500, both on
Moratico Creek; his land on Potomac Creek to be divided equally between
his brother, Joseph Summers, and Mrs. Mary Kibble, and also makes a
bequest to Thomas Todd. Summers and Beverly, executors.

The following chart shows the relationship which would seem from the
records cited to be correct:

                                  Sir Wm. Lovelace=
                                       of Kent    |
                      +----------+-----------+----+------+----------------+
                      |          |           |           |                |
   Rev. John Gorsuch=Anne     Francis     Richard      Thomas           Dudley
                    |       Governor of     the    served in N. Y.   served in N. Y.
                    |        New York       Poet     under Gov.        under Gov.
                    |                                 Lovelace         Lovelace
                    |
   --+-------+------+---------+----------+------------+---------+--------+--------+----
     |       |      |         |          |            |         |        |        |
   Daniel  John  William  Katherine    Ruth         Anne     Richard  Charles   Robert
                             m.         m.           m.                        Lovelace
                          —Whitby   Wm. Whitby  Thos. Todd
                                       of Va.      of Va.

                                                          W. G. STANARD.

  RICHMOND, VA.

  NOTE—Since the above was written I have recalled the account of “The
  Interment of William Lovelace, N. Y., 1671.” This, in mentioning
  Thomas and Dudley Lovelace, as brothers of the Governor, corroborates
  the genealogy I have given.—W. G. S.




       THE INFLUENCE OF SLAVERY ON THE OLD SOUTHERN CIVILIZATION


Now that the “Old South” has passed away as utterly as the ancient
kingdoms of Babylon and Assyria, before the very memory of her shall
have faded from the earth, it may not be without interest to thoughtful
readers to endeavor to trace the cause which produced the striking
dissimilarity between her civilization and that of the Northern States
of the Union. That such dissimilarity existed is beyond dispute; it only
remains, therefore, to attempt to explain it. Beginning National life,
as did the thirteen original colonies, under the same general
conditions; with the heritage of a common origin, a common language, and
a common faith, what influence was it which, within the term of a
hundred years, was potent enough to effect so great a change in the
habits, the manners, and the character of the people of the two
sections?

Was the institution of Slavery mainly responsible for this result? I
believe that it was.

While due allowance must be made for climatic and other local
conditions, the institution of slavery, in its direct and indirect
effects upon the Southern people, appears to be by far the most
important factor in the equation.

Let us briefly consider the subject. On the colonial history of the
Southern States, it is unnecessary to dwell. Suffice it to say, that
while thoroughly imbued with the spirit of independence and taking a
leading part in the struggle of 1776, in this course the South was
actuated by a desire to assert its abstract rights, and to stand loyally
by its sister colonies of the North, rather than by any personal
grievance, or feeling of animosity towards the Mother Country.

Between the Southern States themselves, there were strongly marked
differences, each possessing its own distinctly individual character.
But in essentials, the family likeness between them was strong enough to
make any one member of the group a typical representative of the whole,
so far as the outside world was concerned. Bound indissolubly together
by that common bond,—the institution of slavery,—in politics they were
equally united. From those early days when the American Government was
in its formative stage, down to the period of the Civil War in 1861, the
South stood always a solid unit for republican principles as imbodied in
the Constitution of the United States, and exemplified in the cardinal
Southern doctrine of “States’ Rights.”

The term “democracy” as applied to the South is a total misnomer, and
its application furnishes one of the many curious anomalies to be found
in American political history. But this history is too tangled a skein
to be unravelled here. Enough to say that the Old South was never a
democracy, properly so called; on the contrary, it was an oligarchy of
the most pronounced and exclusive type, its population being sharply
divided into two classes, patrician and plebeian—the governing and the
governed. Nay more, although nominally the entire white population
belonged in the first category (and was therefore eligible for public
office), practically the franchise was confined to the educated and
property-holding class alone, the “poor whites” of the South being too
numerically weak and insignificant to be an appreciable power in
politics.

Thus it came about that, from first to last, in this fundamental
particular the South differed from every other section of the Republic;
and this difference was the direct result of the Institution of Slavery.

Secondly: The economic conditions existing at the South were totally
unlike those in other parts of the country. The Old South was,
emphatically, a community of agriculturists; and of all modes of making
a livelihood agriculture is the one least liable to violent fluctuations
and sudden collapse. It is true that in the South wealth never rolled up
into the millions, and, judged by present standards, bank accounts were
by no means imposing in round numbers; but all the real advantages and
immunities that wealth can give were enjoyed by the Southern people who,
as a class, were in possession of an assured income sufficient not only
for the supply of their necessities, but for the gratification of their
tastes as well. And in those days there was a solidity and a stability
about men’s financial affairs which effectually removed from them the
pressure of anxiety for the future, and protected them from that
feverish, harassing mental strain only too well-known elsewhere.

And here again, we come face to face with that basal fact—“the
institution”—on which rested the whole industrial system of the South.

Again: The intimate relation necessarily existing between economic and
social conditions would lead us to infer that conservatism was the great
law of Southern society. And in truth, permanence and continuity were
its most marked characteristics. The fluctuations and vicissitudes which
formed so striking a feature of Northern social life were practically
unknown at the South. From generation to generation, men occupied the
same habitations, pursued the same callings and held the same place in
the community; and, as a rule, the father’s social status determined
that of the son, and the son’s son after him. Thus was created and
preserved a social atmosphere only attainable under these peculiar
conditions; and the effect of such a social environment upon the whole
tone of the people may readily be conceived.

In the South, for example, the spirit of commercialism was noticeably
absent. Wealth was not there regarded as the “be all” and the “end all”
of existence—the standard by which to measure the sum of human
achievement. Nor was a money value affixed to the thousand and one
little services passing current in the community. These were regarded
simply as small social courtesies due from neighbor to neighbor, and
were freely rendered and as freely accepted, without a thought of
pecuniary obligation on either side.

An equally distinguishing characteristic of Southern society was the
position universally accorded to woman. Southern chivalry has frequently
been made a target for ridicule, as a “survival” from the Dark Ages; but
the elevating and refining influence it exercised upon the public tone
was assuredly a most salutary one. And although, in the light of later
developments, it must be conceded that the old Southern idea of woman’s
helplessness and absolute dependence upon man for support and
protection, savored somewhat of Quixotism, the spirit of knight-errantry
fostered thereby was a wholesome one, in that it acted both as an
incentive to exertion and as an antidote to selfishness. Even the “code
of the duello,” while of course indefensible in principle, had something
to be urged in its favor for, beyond doubt, it exerted a restraining
influence over a hot-blooded people and made for order in the land.

I have said that as a political entity the South consisted of two
classes—the governing and the governed. In its social structure,
however, it was far more complex. Tier above tier rose the social
pyramid, ever narrowing as it neared the apex, on which delectable
elevation rested those favored mortals “born in the purple,” placidly
secure in their social preeminence. Society, that inevitable product of
civilization, is, all the world over, composed of orders and degrees,
but whereas at the North these several gradations merged almost
imperceptibly one into another, at the South they were divided by very
sharply drawn lines of demarcation. The tradesman, the artisan, the
mechanic stood quite apart from the professional classes and the
landed-proprietors. In every age and in every clime talent will assert
itself and rise to the top; and to this rule the South was no exception.
But comparatively speaking, south of Mason and Dixon’s line there were
to be found few “self-made” men, and those few were almost without
exception, men intellectually gifted, who had climbed the social ladder
by the rounds of fame rather than of fortune.

This, however, is a digression; our present purpose being, not to
uncover, fold by fold, the inner intricacies of Southern society, but to
present a broad and inclusive view of that society as a whole, and as
contrasted with the society of other sections. Perhaps this may best be
done by treating the subject somewhat in detail.

In a recent criticism of a Western poet the reviewer remarked that
whatever the poet’s shortcomings might be, his descriptions of homely
rural life must strike a responsive chord in the hearts of his readers
all over the country, carrying them back to scenes and phases of life
with which in youth they were familiar. Now, as a matter of fact, not a
single one of these allusions could awaken an answering echo in a
Southern breast! Descriptions of farm life with its round of labors
performed by the fanner’s own hands, might be interesting reading enough
to the Southerner, but the interest would be that of novelty not of
familiarity. For never in the days of his youth had he himself “driven
the plough,” or joined as a worker in the jocund mirth of a “harvest
home.” Neither would he recognize in the portraiture of the “village
worthies” the companions of his own youth; and rustic wit and rustic
manners were equally apart from his personal experiences.

Not by any means that the lot of the Southern planter was always easier
than that of the Northern farmer. Hard work most generally fell to his
share. Early to rise and late to rest, he toiled as arduously and as
unremittingly as his Northern brother, but the toil was of a different
sort. It consisted not in literally putting his own shoulder to the
wheel, but in training, directing, and supervising the labors of others,
and often (hardest and most harassing work of all) in contriving how to
supply the wants of his numerous dependants. Supreme autocrat within his
own domain, the very consciousness of his power created in him a sense
of responsibility, which produced a strength and gravity of character
and a certain dignity of bearing. Born to control, from his cradle the
Southern land owner was trained to regard himself as the natural
protector, provider, and friend of the weak and the helpless. Thus,
while the environment of the Northern farmer was calculated to make him
think first of his own personal needs and his duty to himself, that of
the Southern planter as naturally impressed upon him the duty he owed to
those by whom he was surrounded.

Such was his work. His pleasures consisted chiefly in
field-sports—hunting, fishing, riding, boating—he was usually a keen
sportsman and a capital rider and sometimes, though not so frequently, a
great reader as well.

If for the most part not scholars, however, Southern men could at least
generally lay claim to a collegiate education. And whether it was due to
vague recollections of classic lore, and lingering memories of Alma
Mater, or to the tone of the home atmosphere by which they were
surrounded (which is, after all, the truly effective educating
influence), certain it is that, as a rule, their manners were polished
and their modes of expression those of the “classes,” not of the
“masses.”

The Southern matron was noted for her administrative rather than for her
executive ability. Not that, generally speaking, her days were passed in
idleness; on the contrary, her life was usually a full and beneficent
one, including not only her domestic avocations—among which may be
mentioned the now well-nigh forgotten accomplishments of cookery and
fine needlework—but the many good offices of a Lady Bountiful which she
graciously dispensed among her numerous dependants; plantation life
affording ample scope for her activities in this direction. But the
menial drudgery of a household did not devolve upon its mistress; and,
in consequence, she had at her command an abundant portion of that
leisure which—while not a _sine qua non_ as regards strictly
intellectual acquirement—is undoubtedly essential to the cultivation of
the mental graces. Truth to say, as a class, Southern women were more
distinguished for their soft femininity and finished refinement of
manner than for their erudition. By which I am far from implying that
they ignored grammar; much less that—in common with their male
relatives—they used the negro-dialect. As a matter of fact indeed, by no
people was purer _dictionary_ English spoken, than by the upper-class in
the Old South.

In its whole internal arrangement and frictionless daily routine the
homelife of the South much more nearly resembled that of the English
gentry, than that of the dwellers in the Northern States of the Union.
Thanks to “the institution,” the household machine was too complex a
mechanism ever to be thrown completely out of gear, the direful domestic
problems so often confronting the Northern housewife being at the South
entirely unknown. And as conditions, homely and trivial in themselves,
sometimes exert an influence on things seemingly beyond their sphere, it
may be that that large hearted, free-handed hospitality for which the
Old South was famed, was in part at least, the result of this feeling of
stability about the domestic foundations.

                                                            H. E. BELIN.

  CHARLESTON, S. C.

                          (_To be continued._)

[Illustration: [Fleuron]]




        ANTHONY WALTON WHITE, BRIGADIER IN THE CONTINENTAL ARMY


The subject of this memoir descended from an ancient and honorable West
of England family, noted for six generations for its military
predilections. The first Anthony of whom we have particulars was a
zealous partisan of Charles I., and left England for Virginia after the
establishment of the Commonwealth; but, stopping at Bermuda, decided to
remain there, where he became a member of the Government. The second
Anthony returned to England and under William III. became a
lieutenant-colonel and served at the battle of the Boyne. In reward for
services, he was appointed a member of the King’s council, and Chief
Justice of the Bermudas; an office which descended to his eldest son,
Leonard, who entered the British Navy and served with distinction. The
third Anthony, Leonard’s eldest son, came to New York about 1715,
married a Miss Staats, and died soon afterwards, on the voyage to
Bermuda. His only son, Anthony (IV.), after holding various civil
offices in the State of New Jersey, entered the army and was a
lieutenant-colonel in 1751. He married Elizabeth, daughter of Lewis
Morris, governor of New Jersey, by whom he had the subject of our
sketch, Anthony, the fifth of the name—his middle name coming from his
godfather, the celebrated William Walton, of the “Walton House,” in the
present Franklin Square, New York City. Anthony was born July 7, 1750,
at the family residence near New Brunswick, N. J.

The family aptitude for officeholding secured him, in due time, several
posts of honor and profit under the Crown, and up to the outbreak of the
Revolution he pursued the ordinary routine life of a country gentleman
of large property; when the hereditary love of arms, and a sincere
attachment to the cause of country, transformed him into the ardent
patriot. In October, 1775, he was appointed an aide to Washington,[8]
and in February, 1776, became Lieutenant-Colonel of the Third N. J.
Battalion. In this capacity he was actively engaged in service at the
North until 1780, when he was transferred to the First Regiment of
Cavalry, and ordered South, to assume general command of the cavalry in
that department.

In July, 1780, despairing of receiving the promised aid from the State
of Virginia, and anxious to join the army under Gates, then in South
Carolina, Colonel White procured on his own personal credit, the funds
necessary to remount and support for a short time, two regiments; with
which he marched to join Gates—fortunately too late to share in the
defeat at Camden (and yet, that same rout might have been a victory, had
a sufficient force of cavalry been among Gates’ men). In 1781, White was
ordered to Virginia to coöperate with Lafayette’s force against
Cornwallis, and several times skirmished with Tarleton. In the winter of
1781–2, he was again in the Carolinas, opposed to him; and in the
operations of Wayne at Savannah, May 21, 1782, Colonel White by his bold
and adroit conduct, contributed largely to the success which followed.
After the evacuation of the city by the enemy, he returned to South
Carolina, and entered Charleston, where his noted generosity was
exemplified by his becoming security for the debts of the officers and
men of his command, who were in want of almost all the necessaries of
life.

They agreed to repay him in tobacco—then the only currency of any stable
value—which was to be delivered to him at Charleston on a fixed date.
Owing partly to the failure of the crop that year, and partly to the
inability of his beneficiaries to carry out their part of the agreement,
he had to part with a large part of his Northern property, at a ruinous
sacrifice. In the spring of 1783, he was married to Margaret Ellis, a
young girl of only fifteen, but who is described as of remarkable
accomplishments, as well as of wealth and beauty. After the conclusion
of hostilities, he returned to the North and settled in New York City to
spend the remainder of his life, as he hoped, in tranquil enjoyment of
well-earned repose, and regain his former affluence; but was unhappily
persuaded by his old army friends to join them in a speculation which,
as the only responsible member of the organization, nearly ruined him as
a result.

In 1793 he removed from New York to his native New Brunswick, where he
spent the rest of his life. He was destined, however, to be once more
called to arms; being appointed by Washington, in 1794, to command the
cavalry in the expedition under Henry Lee, against the Western
insurgents; in the delicate management of which duty, he not only won
the esteem and gratitude of the inhabitants of the region which was the
scene of the insurrection, but the gratitude even of the prisoners whom
he was obliged to take to Philadelphia. He then petitioned Congress for
repayment of the large sums he had advanced to the State of Virginia—but
unsuccessfully; and though his last years were clouded by the loss of
almost all the wealth which was once his, he endured the reverses of
fortune with the courage of an ancient Roman. His homestead at New
Brunswick was frequently the resort of the leading men of the day—and
Kosciuszko was there nursed through a severe sickness, by the
unremitting care of Mrs. White and her daughter, which he gratefully
acknowledged, in letters still owned by the great-granddaughter of
General (as he became) White, Miss Bellita Evans of New Brunswick.
General White was a member of the Society of the Cincinnati,[9] his
insignia of which is now owned by his descendant, Mr. Anthony Walton
White Evans.[10]

General White’s grave, in the cemetery of Christ Church, New Brunswick,
is inscribed:

                     BRIG. GEN. ANTHONY WALTON WHITE,
                         _who departed this life
                      on the 10th of February, 1803
                       in the 53d year of his age,
                  Rests beneath this monumental stone_.

  _He was an affectionate husband, a tender parent, a sincere and
  generous friend, a zealous and inflexible Patriot and a faithful,
  active and gallant officer in the Army of the United States during the
  Revolutionary War._


                                APPENDIX

GENEALOGICAL AND BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES ON THE WHITE FAMILY. The ancestor of
the first Anthony White was sent to Virginia by Raleigh in 1587, as
Governor of his colony. Returning the next year with supplies, he was
defeated by Spanish vessels and obliged to return to England. In 1590 he
found the colony of Roanoke deserted. Leonard (probably his son),
emigrated to Virginia in 1620. Governor White’s daughter was Virginia
Dare, the first white child born in the New World. One of his brothers,
Sir John White, also went to Bermuda, probably in 1609, with Sir George
Somers. It was the “terrible tempest” and shipwreck which dispersed this
company which in 1611 suggested to Shakespeare the play of “The
Tempest.” Sir John White married a descendant of Sir Owen Tudor, the
ancestor of Henry VIII. Joanna White, sister of Anthony Walton, born
Nov. 14, 1744, d. s. p. June 26, 1834; third wife of Col. John Bayard
(born Cecil Co., Md., Aug. 11, 1738). He was a member of the Council of
Safety, Speaker of the House of Representatives, in 1785 a member of the
Old Congress in New York. In 1789 he removed from Philadelphia to New
Brunswick; was Mayor there and Judge of the Common Pleas.

He died Jan. 7, 1807, a patriot of spotless life, public and private. He
was the great-great uncle of the late Senator Bayard.

Euphemia White, second sister of Anthony, born Dec. 10, 1746, d. s. p.
Jan. 29, 1832; married Hon. William Paterson (born 1745; grad. N. J.
Coll. 1763. Att’y Gen’l of N. J. in 1775; in 1793 nominated by
Washington Associate Justice of the U. S. Supreme Court; in 1794
Governor of N. J.; died Sept. 9, 1806).

The Staats family was originally from Albany. Dr. Abraham Staes, who
came to New Netherlands in 1642, was the ancestor of the Staats of
to-day, the name having been changed soon afterwards to its present
form. Dr. Samuel Staats, son of Major Abraham Staats of Albany, studied
medicine in Holland. When New York was surrendered to the English, he
returned to Holland, and remained until William III. became King of
England, when he returned to New York, and died there in 1715.

Being appointed by the King to a Government post in Java, he married
there a native princess, by whom he had six daughters, all of whom
married. In May, 1709, he again married—Catharine Hawarden, of New York.
Of the nine children which he had in 1703, the first five were probably
born in Java or Holland. The Princess’ six daughters were: Sarah,
married Isaac Gouverneur in 1704. Their daughter Sarah became the second
wife of Colonel Lewis Morris, of Morrisania. The second daughter married
in 1716, Andrew Coejman, of Coejman’s Manor near Albany, N. Y. The
third, Catalina, was baptized, N. Y., June 16, 1689. The fourth, Anna
Elizabeth, baptized Dec. 21, 1690, married Captain Johannes Schuyler.
The fifth, Joanna, baptized Jan. 31, 1694, married in 1716, Col. Anthony
White, of Bermuda. Her second husband was Admiral Norton Kelsall, R. N.
The sixth, Tryntje, baptized April 5, 1697, was first wife of Col. Lewis
Morris. His second wife was thus Tryntje’s own niece. Two sons were born
of these two marriages—General Lewis Morris, the “Signer,” and
Gouverneur Morris, who were half-brothers. Another brother, General
Staats Morris, married in London, Catherine, Dowager-Duchess of Gordon.
Their grandfather, Lewis Morris, was the first Royal Governor of New
Jersey (1738). He married in 1691, a daughter of James Graham,
Attorney-General of New York. The mother of Margaret Ellis was ——
Vanderhorst, sister of Elias Vanderhorst, American Consul at Bristol,
England, in 1780, who is mentioned in “Thaddeus of Warsaw.” The family
is represented in the United States by the descendants of Major Arnoldus
Vanderhorst of Charleston.

                                                    A. S. GRAHAM,
                                                    ANNA M. W. WOODHULL.

  NEW BRUNSWICK, N. J.

                          (_To be continued._)




                           ORIGINAL DOCUMENTS


                     TWO EIGHTEENTH CENTURY LETTERS

       [_Communicated by Mr. Wm. C. Lane, Librarian of Harvard_]

  (These two letters from Mrs. Delany—Geo. III’s “Dear Mrs. Delany”—were
  addressed to Capt. Henry Hamilton, who, in the autumn of 1778, had led
  the English expedition from Detroit which, by way of the Maumee and
  the Wabash, reached Fort St. Vincent (Vincennes) and surprised and
  captured it.

  The post was soon after surprised and recaptured by the Americans
  under Capt. George Rogers Clark, and Hamilton was carried a prisoner
  to Williamsburg, Va. He remained in captivity eighteen months under
  very harsh conditions, until sent on parole to New York in October,
  1780. An exchange of prisoners was arranged in March, 1781, and
  Hamilton reached England in June of the same year.

  In 1782 he was again in Canada, and on November 15, 1784, when
  Haldimand left Quebec for England, he succeeded him as governor. The
  next summer he was recalled. He was Governor of Bermuda 1788–94, and
  Governor of Dominica from 1794 till his death in 1797.

  Hamilton’s memoirs and the journal of his expedition from Detroit are
  in the Harvard University Library, and will be printed in book
  form.—W. C. L.)

                            S^T. JAMES PLACE [_London_] _7 Feb^y. 1781_.

  _Dear S^r_:

Being offer’d a safe conveyance for my letter, I cannot resist the
opportunity of congratulating you, on your enlargement from your
Horrible Dungeon; you are too just, and generous to your Friends, not to
have felt their anguish on your Sufferings, and fear, it was no small
aggravation to _them_. My exquisite Friend the Duchess Dow^r of
Po

